                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
            NATIONAL NURSING HOME SURVEY FOLLOW-UP: MORTALITY DATA,            
                                    1984-1990                                  
                                                                               
                                  (ICPSR 6435)                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                             Principal Investigator                            
                                                                               
              United States Department of Health and Human Services            
                      National Center for Health Statistics                    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                               First ICPSR Version                             
                                  January 1996                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                         Inter-university Consortium for                       
                          Political and Social Research                        
                                  P.O. Box 1248                                
                            Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106                          
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
-                                                                              
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                             BIBLIOGRAPHIC CITATION                            
                                                                               
                                                                               
            Publications  based  on  ICPSR  data  collections  should          
            acknowledge  those  sources  by  means  of  bibliographic          
            citations.  To ensure that such source  attributions  are          
            captured  for  social  science  bibliographic  utilities,          
            citations must appear in footnotes or  in  the  reference          
            section  of publications.  The bibliographic citation for          
            this data collection is:                                           
                                                                               
                                                                               
                 U.S.  Dept.  of  Health  and  Human   Services,               
                 National Center for Health Statistics. NATIONAL               
                 NURSING HOME SURVEY FOLLOW-UP: MORTALITY  DATA,               
                 1984-1990   [Computer   file].  ICPSR  version.               
                 Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept of Health and  Human               
                 Services, National Center for Health Statistics               
                 [producer],  1994.  Ann   Arbor,   MI:   Inter-               
                 university  Consortium for Political and Social               
                 Research [distributor], 1996.                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ON USE OF ICPSR RESOURCES              
                                                                               
            To provide funding agencies  with  essential  information          
            about  use  of  archival  resources and to facilitate the          
            exchange  of  information   about   ICPSR   participants'          
            research activities, users of ICPSR data are requested to          
            send to ICPSR bibliographic citations for each  completed          
            manuscript or thesis abstract. Please indicate in a cover          
            letter which data were used.                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                 DATA DISCLAIMER                               
                                                                               
            The original  collector  of  the  data,  ICPSR,  and  the          
            relevant  funding  agency bear no responsibility for uses          
            of this collection or for interpretations  or  inferences          
            based upon such uses.                                              
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                         DATA COLLECTION DESCRIPTION                           
                                                                               
                                                                               
     United States Department of Health  and  Human  Services.  National       
     Center for Health Statistics                                              
          NATIONAL NURSING HOME SURVEY FOLLOW-UP: MORTALITY DATA,  1984-       
     1990 (ICPSR 6435)                                                         
                                                                               
     SUMMARY: The NATIONAL NURSING HOME SURVEY FOLLOW-UP  (NNHSF)  (WAVE       
     I,  1987  [ICPSR  9813],  WAVE II, 1988 [ICPSR 9838], and WAVE III,       
     1990 [ICPSR 6142]) is a longitudinal study that followed the cohort       
     of current and discharged residents sampled in the NATIONAL NURSING       
     HOME SURVEY, 1985 (NNHS) (ICPSR 8914). To  generate  the  mortality       
     data  for this collection, 12,348 NNHSF records were matched to the       
     National Death Index (NDI) to determine whether the NNHSF  subjects       
     who  were  alive  at the last contact had died or if dates of death       
     obtained during the follow-up waves were accurate.  Of  the  12,348       
     records  sent  to  NDI for matching, 6,507 matches were found to be       
     true or highly  probable  matches  based  on  a  scoring  algorithm       
     developed  to  determine  the quality of the NDI match. These 6,507       
     records were  then  matched  to  the  National  Center  for  Health       
     Statistics' Multiple Cause of Death files. Mortality data variables       
     include the residence, marital status, education, race, and age  of       
     the  decedent  and  the  place  and  date  of death, as well as the       
     underlying cause of death and multiple conditions of death.               
                                                                               
     NOTE: Per agreement with NCHS, ICPSR distributes the  data  file(s)       
     and  technical  documentation  in this collection in their original       
     form as prepared by NCHS.                                                 
                                                                               
     RESTRICTIONS: In preparing the data file(s)  for  this  collection,       
     the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) has removed direct       
     identifiers and characteristics that might lead  to  identification       
     of data subjects. As an additional precaution, NCHS requires, under       
     Section 308(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42  U.S.C.  242m),       
     that  data collected by NCHS not be used for any purpose other than       
     statistical analysis and  reporting.  NCHS  further  requires  that       
     analysts  not  use the data to learn the identity of any persons or       
     establishments and that the director of NCHS  be  notified  if  any       
     identities  are inadvertently discovered. ICPSR member institutions       
     and other users ordering data from ICPSR are expected to adhere  to       
     these restrictions.                                                       
                                                                               
     EXTENT OF COLLECTION: 1 data file + machine-readable  documentation       
     (text)                                                                    
                                                                               
     EXTENT OF PROCESSING: SCAN                                                
                                                                               
     DATA FORMAT: Logical Record Length                                        
                                                                               
     File Structure: rectangular                                               
     Cases: 6,507                                                              
     Variables: approx. 40                                                     
     Record Length: 440                                                        
     Records Per Case: 1                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
     Public use                                                                
     Data Tape                                                                 
     Documentation                                                             
                                                                               
                                                                               
     National Nursing Home Survey Followup                                     
     Mortality Data Tape                                                       
     1984-1990                                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                September, 1994                                
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 2                                                      ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                      Page 3    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                   CONTENTS                                    
                                                                               
                                                                               
     Data Use Restrictions.............................................   5    
                                                                               
     Introduction to the NNHSF Mortality Data Tape Documentation.......   7    
                                                                               
     NCHS Procedures Used to Code Multiple Cause Data..................  13    
                                                                               
     NNHSF Mortality Data Tape Characteristics.........................  20    
                                                                               
     NNHSF Mortality Data Tape Record Layout...........................  21    
                                                                               
     NNHSF Mortality Public Use Data Tape Documentation................  23    
                                                                               
                                                                               
     Appendix 1 NCHS ICD-9th Revision 52 Cause-of-Death Recodes........  43    
     Appendix 2 NCHS ICD-9th Revision 282 Cause-of-Death Recodes.......  45    
     Appendix 3 NCHS ICD-9th Revision 72 Cause-of-Death Recodes........  58    
     Appendix 4 NCHS ICD-9th Revision 34 Cause-of-Death Recodes........  62    
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 4                                                      ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                      Page 5    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                        WARNING! DATA USE RESTRICTIONS                         
                          Read Carefully Before Using                          
                                                                               
     The Public Health Service Act (Section 308 (d)) provides that the         
     data collected by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS),       
     Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), may be used only        
     for the purpose of health statistical reporting and analysis.             
                                                                               
     Any effort to determine the identity of any reported case is              
     prohibited by this law.                                                   
                                                                               
     NCHS does all it can to assure that the identity of data subjects         
     cannot be disclosed.  All direct identifiers, as well any                 
     characteristics that might lead to identification, are omitted from       
     the dataset.  Any intentional identification or disclosure of a           
     person or establishment violates the assurances of confidentiality        
     given to the providers of the information.  Therefore, users will:        
                                                                               
     1. Use the data in this dataset for statistical reporting and             
        analysis only.                                                         
                                                                               
     2. Make no use of the identity of any person or establishment             
        discovered inadvertently and advise the Director, NCHS, of any         
        such discovery.                                                        
                                                                               
     3. Not link this dataset with other individually identifiable             
        data from NCHS or other sources with the exception of the              
        National Nursing Home Survey Followup tapes described in this          
        document.                                                              
                                                                               
     By using these data you signify your agreement to comply with the         
     above-stated Statutorily-based requirements.                              
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 6                                                      ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                      Page 7    
                                                                               
                                                                               
          INTRODUCTION TO THE NNHSF MORTALITY DATA TAPE DOCUMENTATION          
                                                                               
     BACKGROUND                                                                
                                                                               
     The National Nursing Home Survey Followup (NNHSF) is a longitudinal       
     study which follows the cohort of current residents and discharged        
     residents sampled in the 1985 National Nursing Home Survey (NNHS).        
     The NNHSF builds on the data collected in 1985 NNHS by extending the      
     period of observation by approximately 5 years and providing              
     longitudinal information on nursing home and hospital utilization.        
     The followup consists of three waves of data collection.  Wave I was      
     conducted from August through December 1987.  Wave II began in July       
     1988 and ended in November of that same year.  Wave III interviewing      
     began in January 1990 and was completed in April 1990.  The study was     
     a collaborative project between the National Center for Health            
     Statistics (NCHS), Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the National     
     Institute on Aging (NIA).                                                 
                                                                               
     The 1985 NNHS collected a variety of information about long-term care     
     facilities and their residents.  Data were collected on a sample of       
     patients who were current residents at the time of contact with the       
     facility as well as a sample of discharges that occurred within the       
     12 months prior to the facility contact.  There were 5,243 current        
     residents and 6,023 discharges.  For the current residents, detailed      
     information was collected regarding dependence in activities of daily     
     living, functional impairments, diagnoses, the receipt of services,       
     cognitive and emotional status, charges, source of payments, and a        
     number of other topics of considerable prognostic significance.  For      
     the discharged residents, detailed information was obtained regarding     
     diagnoses and services, nursing home and hospital use prior to the        
     sampled nursing home stay, hospitalizations during the sample stay,       
     and nursing home readmissions subsequent to the sample stay.              
                                                                               
     To supplement the current and discharged resident components, the         
     1985 NNHS included a Next-of-Kin (NOK) component.  The NOK interview,     
     using a Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI) system, was       
     designed to collect information about current and former nursing home     
     residents that is not generally available from patient records or         
     other sources in the nursing home.  Information on the resident's         
     characteristics prior to admission and history of prior nursing home      
     utilization was collected.  The Next-of-Kin questionnaire was             
     administered to a family member, the former resident, an                  
     institutional representative, or another knowledgeable person who         
     could answer questions about the resident.  All residents for whom a      
     Current Resident Questionnaire (CRQ) or a Discharged Resident             
     Questionnaire (DRQ) had been completed during the field data              
     collection portion of the NNHS were eligible for the NOK component.       
     As stated earlier, the current resident file contained 5,243 cases        
     and the discharge resident file contained 6,023 sample discharge          
     cases.  Since the DRQ sample is an event sample, an individual            
     resident could have more than one stay in the discharged resident         
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 8                                                      ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
     sample and/or could have stays in both the current resident and           
     discharged resident samples.  The NOK, however, was designed to           
     follow residents and not events.  Thus, only the first stay for any       
     resident was eligible for the NOK.  Eleven thousand one hundred and       
     eighty one (11,181) individuals, - 5,200 CRQ's and 5,981 DRQ's, were      
     identified on the resident CRQ/DRQ tapes after accounting for those       
     residents who had more than one sampled stay.  Of those eligible,         
     9,077 respondents were interviewed.  Thirty three percent (n=3,023)       
     of the sample were found to be deceased at the NOK.  The Next-of-Kin      
     interview was conducted about three months after the facility             
     contact, beginning in October, 1985.                                      
                                                                               
     The National Nursing Home Survey Followup obtained additional             
     information on a portion of the residents for whom a CRQ or a DRQ was     
     completed. Of the 6,607 subjects who were identified for inclusion in     
     Wave I, interviews were completed for 6,001 subjects.  At the time of     
     wave II, 4,040 subjects were eligible for interviewing.  Some             
     information was collected on 3,868 subjects.  Three thousand one          
     hundred and twenty one (3,121) subjects were identified as                
     potentially eligible for Wave III.  Some information was obtained at      
     Wave III on 3,041 subjects.                                               
                                                                               
     In all waves of the followup, the preferred respondent was someone        
     who knew about the subject's experiences since the last contact.          
     Facility respondents were used if the subject was a nursing home          
     resident at the last contact and community based respondents were         
     used if the subject had been discharged into the community.  The          
     survey was designed to allow more than one respondent to be used, if      
     necessary, in order to maximize the amount of information collected.      
     For example, if a community respondent was contacted and in the           
     course of the interview it was learned that the subject had been          
     readmitted to a facility, that facility was then contacted, if            
     necessary, to obtain information on utilization since that admission      
     as well as information on current status.  Conversely, if a facility      
     was contacted initially and in the course of the interview it was         
     learned that the subject had been discharged, a new respondent was        
     contacted (either a relative, or the subject depending on the type of     
     discharge) if necessary, to provide information on the subject's          
     current status.  Usually, the respondent who provided the information     
     at the previous wave was the first respondent contacted at the next       
     wave.  Although more than one respondent could be contacted for data      
     collection purposes, information was merged from all respondents          
     concerning a subject to provide one complete, consecutive record of       
     nursing home and hospital stays.                                          
                                                                               
     The NNHSF interviews were conducted using a CATI system.  With CATI,      
     data collection and data entry are concurrent and computer-controlled.    
     The CATI questionnaire used for the NNHSF was a modified version of       
     the questionnaire developed for the Next-of-Kin Component of the 1985     
     NNHS.  At each wave, questions concerning vital status, nursing home      
     and hospital utilization since the last contact, current living           
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                      Page 9    
                                                                               
                                                                               
     arrangements, Medicare number and source of payment were asked.           
     Programming was slightly modified at wave II and again at Wave III.       
     Unless otherwise specified on the questionnaire, the same set of          
     questions was asked irrespective of whether the respondent was a          
     subject, next-of-kin, or a facility official.                             
                                                                               
     Approximately 1-2 weeks before the start of the data collection           
     period, advance letters were mailed to respondents.  A letter was         
     mailed to each primary respondent for whom an address was available.      
     A special introductory paragraph which included the contents of the       
     letter was added to the questionnaire for respondents for whom no         
     address was available.  Upon contacting the appropriate respondent,       
     the interviewer proceeded with the interview, if possible, or             
     scheduled a time to call back.  A minimum of five attempts were made      
     to contact each potential respondent for whom there appeared to be a      
     workable telephone number.                                                
                                                                               
     Many of the respondents were the facilities in which the residents        
     were living at the time of the field interview.  To reduce the number     
     of contacts with these facilities, the letter listed all the subjects     
     about whom the facility would be asked.  This eliminated the need for     
     multiple letters to the same nursing home.  The CATI questionnaire        
     was programmed to allow the interviewer to complete all cases within      
     a sample nursing home on one call without having to reread the            
     introduction.  If a sample nursing home refused to participate or         
     could not be contacted, all cases that should have been completed by      
     the facility were changed to "proxy" interviews.  In some cases the       
     names of the proxies to be contacted were given by the facility; in       
     most cases, however, interviewers had to use the names listed in the      
     CATI respondent roster for the NOK questionnaire.                         
                                                                               
     If the designated respondent could not or would not participate, the      
     interviewer attempted to obtain the name and telephone number of          
     another potential respondent.  If the designated respondent could not     
     be located, other contact names that were in the NOK CATI file were       
     examined and attempts were made to locate and interview another           
     individual.                                                               
                                                                               
     Detailed information on the design, content, and operation of the         
     NNHSF may be found in the Plan and Operation of the National Nursing      
     Home Survey Followup, 1987, 1988, 1990, VITAL AND HEALTH STATISTICS,      
     Series 1, No. 30.                                                         
                                                                               
     The data collected from the NNHSF are stored on four separate tapes:      
                                                                               
          1)  National Nursing Home Survey Followup: Wave I, 1987,             
          2)  National Nursing Home Survey Followup: Wave II, 1988,            
          3)  National Nursing Home Survey Followup: Wave III, 1990, and       
          4)  National Nursing Home Survey Followup Mortality Data Tape,       
              1984-1990.  This tape is discussed below.                        
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 10                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
     DESCRIPTION OF THE NNHSF MORTALITY TAPE                                   
                                                                               
     To create the Mortality data tape, record linking and matching of         
     files had to be performed.  The NNHSF matched survey records with two     
     record bases: The National Death Index (NDI), the computerized            
     records of deaths in the United States maintained by NCHS, and the        
     Multiple Cause-of-Death file maintained by NCHS.                          
                                                                               
     The NDI is a computerized file of death record information compiled       
     from magnetic tapes submitted under contractual arrangements to NCHS      
     by the State vital statistics offices.  The NDI can be used only for      
     statistical purposes in medical and health research.  An application      
     to obtain information from the NDI was submitted to the Division of       
     Vital Statistics (DVS) within NCHS.  The application was reviewed and     
     approved by the Director of NCHS and by an advisory panel composed of     
     persons not employed by NCHS.  The application included a statement       
     of the purpose and objectives of the match, the number of records to      
     be matched, how the NDI data would be used, and how and to whom the       
     results would be released.                                                
                                                                               
     Matching to the NDI determined if persons in the NNHSF who were alive     
     at the last contact had died or if a date of death obtained during        
     one of the followup waves was accurate.  A file containing 12,348         
     NNHSF records was sent to DVS requesting information for the years        
     1984 through 1990.  Information submitted for use in the NDI match        
     included: first, middle and last name; social security number; month,     
     day and year of birth; sex, race, marital status and state of             
     residence.  For each decedent, the NDI provided the name of the State     
     where the death occurred, the corresponding death certificate number,     
     and the date of death.  The matching criteria in the NDI retrieval        
     program were designed such that the number of potential matches           
     identified would be maximized.  Because of this design feature, the       
     retrieval program generated a significant number of false matches.        
     All NDI matches were examined and false ones were identified.             
                                                                               
     NDI MATCHING CRITERIA                                                     
                                                                               
     A scoring algorithm was developed to determine the quality of the NDI     
     match.  The following methodology was used to assess the probability      
     of obtaining a true match:                                                
                                                                               
     1. Each potential match was assigned an initial score of 0.               
        Points were added to the score for each of the following field         
        level matching situations between the user submitted field             
        value and the value in the NDI record:                                 
                                                                               
        10 points if last names match exactly                                  
                                                                               
        2 points if middle initials match or user provided no middle           
          initial                                                              
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 11    
                                                                               
                                                                               
        5 points if first names match exactly                                  
                                                                               
        3 points if user last name sounds like the NDI last name               
                                                                               
        1 point if first initial of user first name field matches              
                                                                               
        3 points if first initial of first name matches and user               
          first name sounds like NDI first name                                
                                                                               
        5 points for each digit of the social security number that             
          matches                                                              
                                                                               
        4 points if days of birth match                                        
                                                                               
        4 points if months of birth match                                      
                                                                               
        8 points if years of birth match                                       
                                                                               
        4 extra points if 2 of 3 birth date fields match or                    
                                                                               
        9 extra points if all three birth date fields match                    
                                                                               
        1 point if user birth year is within two years (plus or minus)         
          of the NDI birth year or                                             
                                                                               
        3 points if user birth year is within one year (plus or minus)         
          of the NDI birth year                                                
                                                                               
        10 points if sex fields match                                          
                                                                               
        1 point if race fields match                                           
                                                                               
        1 point if marital status fields match                                 
                                                                               
        1 point if state of residence fields match                             
                                                                               
     2. Records where all user provided data match NDI data were initially     
        considered true matches.                                               
                                                                               
     3. Records with scores above 85 were also initially considered true       
        matches as long as there was only one such possible match for a        
        given person.  Where more than one exact match and/or match with a     
        score of 85 or more occurred for a given person, the matches were      
        adjudicated by hand.  Records with scores between 50 and 85 were       
        also adjudicated by hand.                                              
                                                                               
     4. The Social Security Number accounted for 45 points in the total        
        score of 100.  Records with scores less than 50 were considered        
        and adjudicated using the remaining available data if either the       
        NNHSF or NDI data was missing the Social Security Number.  Primary     
        consideration was given to name and birth date.                        
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 12                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
     Regardless of score, the death date on all selected matches was           
     compared with dates of death collected during the field and followup      
     surveys.  Before being finalized as a true match, the NDI death date      
     was evaluated with respect to the date that the subject was reported      
     to have died or was last thought to be alive as well as the               
     relationship to the subject of the source of this vital status            
     information.  In a few situations the date of death obtained from the     
     probable NDI match was inconsistent with the date the subject had         
     been reported deceased or last known alive, but there was also reason     
     to believe the respondent would not have known the exact date of          
     death.  For these cases, the probable match has been included with        
     the file.  Such matches have been coded and the user may include them     
     in analysis at his or her discretion.  Of the 12,348 records              
     originally sent to NDI for matching, 6,507 of those matches were          
     found to be true or highly probable matches.  These were then matched     
     to the NCHS multiple cause-of-death file.                                 
                                                                               
     MULTIPLE CAUSE-OF-DEATH FILE                                              
                                                                               
     Multiple cause-of-death data have been obtained for the NNHSF sample      
     persons who were identified as deceased in the NDI match.  To obtain      
     information from the multiple cause-of-death file, a memorandum           
     requesting permission for the linkage was submitted to the Director       
     of vital Statistics (DVS), National Center for Health Statistics.         
                                                                               
     This memorandum described the objectives of the survey, the               
     confidentiality provisions taken by the study staff, and the plans        
     for the release of the data.  The data can be used only for the           
     purposes described in the NDI application.                                
                                                                               
     Permission was granted to match the NNHSF decedents identified in the     
     NDI match with the multiple cause-of-death file maintained by NCHS.       
     Based on the contracts with the States, such permission may be            
     granted only under NCHS' own legislative authority.                       
                                                                               
     Only matches identified by the NDI match as "true" and "probable"         
     were sent for matching to the multiple cause-of-death file.  The file     
     sent for matching the multiple cause-of-death file had to conform to      
     the format specified in the National Death Index User's Manual (9).       
     The linkage itself was performed by the DVS Systems and Programming       
     Branch, which is responsible for linking the decedent cases               
     identified by the NDI match with the multiple cause-of-death file.        
                                                                               
     MORTALITY DATA TAPE                                                       
                                                                               
     The NNHSF Mortality Public Use tape contains the multiple cause-          
     of-death information for all 6,507 subjects for whom a match was          
     selected from the NDI.  Data for these subjects was obtained from         
     their last and/or final interview.  There were 633 (9.7%) subjects        
     who had only the 1985 baseline interview from which to provide            
     information.  Data was last obtained at the NOK for 2,575 (39.6%)         
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 13    
                                                                               
                                                                               
     subjects who were not in any of the later followup waves.  Wave I had     
     1,685 (25.9%) completed interviews with no additional waves; Wave II      
     had 616 (9.5%) completed interviews with no Wave III followup; and        
     wave-III interviews were completed for 998 (15.3%) of the total           
     subjects.                                                                 
                                                                               
     Positions 10-16 in the data tape contain the Identification Number.       
     This number is unique for each subject and is used when linking           
     files.  By using the ID Number, the NNHSF Mortality Data tape can be      
     linked to all the 1985 NNHS data tapes and to each wave of the three      
     NNHSF data tapes.                                                         
                                                                               
     The NNHSF Mortality Public Use Data tape follows the coding               
     specifications used for the NCHS Multiple Cause-of-Death Public Use       
     Data tapes.  An asterisk next to variables listed in the record           
     layout documentation indicates that the variable was generated from       
     NNHSF data.  All other variables are extracted directly from the NCHS     
     multiple cause-of-death file.                                             
                                                                               
     QUESTIONS                                                                 
                                                                               
     Questions concerning data on this tape should be directed to the          
     Division of Epidemiology, National Center for Health Statistics, 6525     
     Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, Maryland 20782.                               
                                                                               
               NCHS PROCEDURES USED TO CODE MULTIPLE CAUSE DATA                
                                                                               
     The original scheme for coding conditions listed on the death             
     certificate was designed with two objectives in mind.  First, to          
     facilitate etiological studies of the relationships among conditions,     
     it was necessary to reflect accurately, in coded form, each condition     
     and its location on the certification in the exact manner given by        
     the certifier.  Secondly, the codification needed to be carried out       
     in a manner by which the underlying cause-of-death could be assigned      
     through computer applications.  The approach was to suspend the           
     linkage provisions of the ICD for the purpose of condition coding and     
     code each entity with minimum regard to other conditions present on       
     the certification.  This general approach is hereafter called entity      
     coding.                                                                   
                                                                               
     Unfortunately, the set of multiple cause codes produced by entity         
     coding is not conducive to a third objective--the generation of           
     person-based multiple cause statistics.  Person-based analysis            
     requires that each condition be coded within the context of every         
     other condition on the same certificate and modified or linked to         
     such conditions as provided by ICD-9.  By definition, the entity data     
     cannot meet this requirement since the linkage provisions distort the     
     character and placement of the information originally recorded by the     
     certifying physician.                                                     
                                                                               
     Since the two objectives are incompatible, the Division of Vital          
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 14                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
     Statistics (DVS) at the National Center for Health Statistics chose       
     to create from the original set of entity codes a new code set called     
     record axis multiple cause data.  Essentially, the axis of                
     classification-has been converted from an entity basis to a record        
     (or person) basis.  The record axis codes are assigned in terms of        
     the set of codes that best describe the overall medical certification     
     portion of the death certificate.  The translation is accomplished by     
     a computer system called TRANSAX (TRANSLATION OF AXIS) through            
     selective use of traditional linkage and modification rules for           
     mortality coding.  Underlying cause linkages which simply prefer one      
     code over another for purposes of underlying cause selection are not      
     included.  Each entity code on the record is examined and modified or     
     deleted as necessary to create a set of codes which are free of           
     contradictions and are the most precise within the constraints of         
     ICD-9 and medical information on the record.  Repetitive codes are        
     deleted.  The process may (1) combine two entity axis categories          
     together to a new category thereby eliminating a contradiction or         
     standardizing the data; or (2) eliminate one category in favor of         
     another to promote specificity of the data or resolve contradictions.     
     The following examples from ICD-9 illustrate the effect of this           
     translation:                                                              
                                                                               
               Case 1: When reported on the same record as separate            
                       entities, cirrhosis of liver and alcoholism             
                       are coded to 5715 (cirrhosis of liver without           
                       mention of alcohol) and 303 (alcohol                    
                       dependence syndrome).  Tabulation of records            
                       with 5715 would on the surface falsely imply            
                       that such records had no mention of alcohol.            
                       A preferable codification would be 5712                 
                       (alcoholic cirrhosis of liver) in lieu of               
                       both 5715 and 303.                                      
                                                                               
               Case 2: If "gastric ulcer" and "bleeding gastric                
                       ulcer" are reported on a record they are                
                       coded to 5319 (gastric ulcer, unspecified as            
                       acute or chronic, without mention of                    
                       hemorrhage or perforation) and 5314 (gastric            
                       ulcer, chronic or unspecified, with                     
                       hemorrhage).  A more concise codification               
                       would be to code 5314 only since the 5314               
                       shows both the gastric ulcer and the bleeding.          
                                                                               
     A.   ENTITY AXIS CODES                                                    
                                                                               
          The original conditions coded for selection of the underlying        
          cause-of-death are reformatted and edited prior to creating the      
          public use tape.  The following paragraphs describe the format       
          and application of entity axis data.                                 
                                                                               
     FORMAT: Each entity-axis code is displayed as an overall seven byte       
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 15    
                                                                               
                                                                               
     code with subcomponents as follows:                                       
                                                                               
          1. line indicator:        The first byte represents the line         
                                    of the certificate on which the            
                                    code appears.  Six lines (1-6) are         
                                    allowable with the fourth and fifth        
                                    denoting one or two written in "due        
                                    tolls beyond the three lines               
                                    provided in Part I of the U.S.             
                                    standard death certificate.  Line          
                                    "6" represents Part II of the              
                                    certificate.                               
                                                                               
          2. position indicator:    The next byte indicates the                
                                    position of the codes on the line,         
                                    i.e., it is the first (1), second          
                                    (2), ---eighth (8) code on the line.       
                                                                               
          3. cause category:        The next four bytes represent the          
                                    ICD-9 cause code.                          
                                                                               
          4. nature of injury flag: ICD-9 uses the same series of              
                                    numbers (800-999) to indicate              
                                    nature of injury (N codes) and             
                                    external cause codes (E codes).            
                                    This flag distinguishes between            
                                    the two with a one (1)                     
                                    representing nature of injury              
                                    codes and a zero (0)                       
                                    representing all other cause               
                                    codes.                                     
                                                                               
          A maximum of 20 of these seven byte codes is captured on a           
          record for multiple cause purposes.  This may consist of a           
          maximum of 8 codes on any given line with up to 20 codes             
          distributed across three or more lines depending on where the        
          subject conditions are located on the certificate.                   
                                                                               
          Codes may be omitted from one or more lines, e.g., line 1 with       
          one or more codes, line 2 with no codes, line 3 with one or more     
          codes.                                                               
                                                                               
          In writing out these codes, they are ordered as follows: line 1      
          first code, line 1 second code, etc. ----- line 2 first code,        
          line 2 second code, etc. ----- line 3 ----- line 4 ----- line 5      
          ----- line 6.  Any space remaining in the field is left blank.       
                                                                               
          EDIT: The original conditions are edited to remove invalid           
          codes, reverify the coding of certain rare causes of death, and      
          assure age/cause and sex/cause compatibility.  Detailed              
          information relating to the edit criteria and the sets of cause      
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 16                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
          codes which are valid to underlying cause coding and multiple        
          cause coding are provided in Part 11 of the NCHS Vital Statistics    
          Instructions Manual Series.                                          
                                                                               
          ENTITY AXIS APPLICATIONS: The entity axis multiple cause data        
          set is appropriate to analyses which require that each condition     
          be coded as a stand alone entity without linkage to other            
          conditions and/or require information on the placement of such       
          conditions in the certificate.  Within this framework, the           
          entity data are appropriate to the examination of etiological        
          relationships among conditions, accuracy of certification            
          reporting, and the validity of traditional assumptions in            
          underlying cause selection.  Additionally, the entity data           
          provide in certain categories a more detailed code assignment        
          which is linked out in the creation of record axis data. Where       
          such detail is needed for a study, the user should selectively       
          employ entity data.  Finally, the researcher may not wish to be      
          bound by the assumptions used in the axis translation process        
          preferring rather to investigate hypotheses of his own               
          predilection.                                                        
                                                                               
     By definition, the main limitation of entity axis data is that an         
     entity code does not necessarily reflect the best code for a              
     condition when considered within the context of the medical               
     certification as a whole.  As a result certain entity codes can be        
     misleading or even contradict other codes in the record.  For             
     example, category 5750 is titled "Acute cholecystitis without mention     
     of calculus." Within the framework of entity codes this is                
     interpreted to mean that the codable entity itself contained no           
     mention of calculus rather than that calculus was not mentioned           
     anywhere on the record.  Tabulation of records with a "5750" as a         
     count of persons having acute cholecystitis without mention of            
     calculus would therefore be erroneous.  This illustrates the fact         
     that under entity coding the ICD-9 titles cannot be taken literally.      
     The user must study the rules for entity coding as they relate to         
     his/her research prior to utilization of entity data.  The user is        
     further cautioned that the inclusion notes in ICD-9 which relate to       
     modifying and combining categories are seldom applicable to entity        
     coding (except where provided in Part 2b of the Vital Statistics          
     Instruction Manual Series).                                               
                                                                               
     In tabulating the entity axis data, one may count codes with the          
     resultant tabulation of an individual code representing the number of     
     times the disease(s) represented by the code appears in the file.  In     
     this kind of tabulation of morbid condition prevalence, the counts        
     among categories may be added together to produce counts for groups       
     of codes.  Alternatively, subject to the limitations given above one      
     may count persons having mention of the disease represented by a code     
     or codes.  In this instance it is not correct to add counts for           
     individual codes to create person counts for groups of codes.  Since      
     more than one code in the researcher's interest may appear together       
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 17    
                                                                               
                                                                               
     on the certificate, totaling must account for higher order                
     interactions among codes.  Up to 20 codes may be assigned on a            
     record; therefore, a 20-way interaction is theoretically possible.        
     All totaling must be based on mention of one or more of the               
     categories under investigation.                                           
                                                                               
     B.   RECORD AXIS CODES                                                    
                                                                               
          The following paragraphs describe the format and application         
          of record-axis data.  Part 2f of the Vital Statistics                
          Instruction Manual Series describes the TRANSAX process for          
          creating record axis data from entity axis data.                     
                                                                               
          FORMAT: Each record (or person) axis code is displayed in            
          five bytes.  Locational information is not relevant.  The            
          code consists of the following components:                           
                                                                               
          1. cause category:        The first four bytes represent             
                                    the ICD-9 cause code.                      
                                                                               
          2. nature of injury flag: The last byte contains a 0 or 1            
                                    with the 1 indicating that the             
                                    cause is a nature of injury                
                                    category.                                  
                                                                               
          Again, a maximum of 20 codes are captured on a record for            
          multiple cause purposes.                                             
                                                                               
          EDIT: The record axis codes are edited for rare causes and           
          age/cause and sex/cause compatibility.  Likewise, individual         
          code validity is checked.  The valid code set for record             
          axis coding is the same as that for entity coding.                   
                                                                               
          RECORD AXIS APPLICATIONS: The record axis multiple cause data        
          set is the basis for NCHS core multiple cause tabulations.           
          Location of codes is not relevant to this data set and               
          conditions have been linked into the most meaningful categories      
          for the certification.  The most immediate consequences for the      
          user is that the codes on the record already represent mention       
          of a disease assignable to that particular ICD-9 category.  This     
          is in contrast to the entity code which is assigned each time        
          such a disease is reported on two different lines of the             
          certification.  Secondly, the linkage implies that within the        
          constraints of ICD-9 the most meaningful code has been assigned.     
          The translation process creates for the user a data set which is     
          edited for contradictions, duplicate codes, and imprecisions.        
          In contrast to entity axis data, record axis data are classified     
          in a manner comparable to underlying cause-of-death                  
          classification thereby facilitating joint analysis of these          
          variables.  Likewise, they are comparable to general morbidity       
          coding where the linkage provisions of ICD-9 are usually             
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 18                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
          utilized.  A potential disadvantage of record axis data is that      
          some detail is sacrificed in a number of the linkages.               
                                                                               
     The user can take the record axis code as literally representing the      
     information conveyed in ICD-9 category titles.  While knowledge of        
     the rules for combining and linking and coding conditions is useful,      
     it is not a prerequisite to meaningful analysis of the data as long       
     as one is willing to accept the assumptions of the axis translation       
     process.  The user is cautioned, however, that due to special rules       
     in mortality coding, not all linkage notes in ICD-9 are utilized.         
     (See Part 2f of the Vital Statistics Instruction Manual Series.)          
                                                                               
     The user should proceed with caution in using record axis data to         
     count conditions as opposed to people with conditions since linkages      
     have been invoked and duplicate codes have been eliminated.  As with      
     entity data, person-based tabulations which combine individual cause      
     categories must take into account the possible interaction of up to       
     20 codes on a single certificate.                                         
                                                                               
     If on the surface it is not obvious whether entity axis or record         
     axis data should be employed in a given application, detailed             
     examination of Part 2f of the Vital Statistics Instruction Manual         
     Series and its attachments will probably provide the necessary            
     information to make a decision.  It allows the user to determine the      
     extent of the trade-offs between the two sets of data in terms of         
     specific categories and the assumptions of axis translation.  In          
     certain situations, a combination of entity and record axis data may      
     be the more appropriate alternative.                                      
                                                                               
     ADDITIONAL REFERENCE DOCUMENTS FOR CODING PROCEDURES                      
                                                                               
     The following documents provide detailed information on the rules         
     employed for coding multiple cause-of-death information from death        
     certificate records:                                                      
                                                                               
     1.   Manual of the International Statistical Classification of            
          Diseases, Injuries, and Causes of Death: Based on the                
          Recommendations of the Ninth Revision Conference, 1975, and          
          Adopted by the Twenty-ninth World Health Assembly, Volumes 1         
          and 2, 1977 (World Health organization).                             
                                                                               
     2.   NCHS Instruction Manual Data Preparation Part 2a, Vital              
          Statistics Instructions for Classifying the Underlying Cause         
          of Death, 1979.                                                      
                                                                               
     3.   NCHS Instruction Manual Data Preparation, Part 2b, Vital             
          Statistics Instructions for Classifying Multiple Causes of           
          Death, 1979.                                                         
                                                                               
     4.   NCHS Instruction Manual Data Preparation, Part 2c, Vital             
          Statistics ICD-9 ACME Decision Tables for Classifying                
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 19    
                                                                               
                                                                               
          Underlying Causes of Death, 1979.                                    
                                                                               
     5.   NCHS Instruction Manual Data Preparation, Part 2f, Vital             
          Statistics ICD-9 TRANSAX Disease Reference Tables for                
          Classifying Multiple Causes of Death, 1981.                          
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 20                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                   NNHSF MORTALITY DATA TAPE CHARACTERISTICS                   
                                                                               
                                                                               
     Title:                       NNHSF Mortality Data Tape                    
                                                                               
     Data Set Name:               NNHSF.MORTTAPE.PUB90                         
                                                                               
     Record Length:               440                                          
                                                                               
     Blocksize:                   23,320                                       
                                                                               
     Number of Records:           6,507                                        
                                                                               
     Recording Mode:              FIXED BLOCK, EBCDIC                          
                                                                               
     Density:                     IBM 3480 cartridge tape                      
                                                                               
     Created by:                  Office of Analysis, Epidemiology             
                                  and Health Promotion                         
                                  Division of Epidemiology                     
                                  National Center for Health Statistics        
                                  Presidential Building, Room 750              
                                  6525 Belcrest Road                           
                                  Hyattsville, Maryland  20782                 
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 21    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                    NNHSF MORTALITY DATA TAPE RECORD LAYOUT                    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                  TAPE         
               DATA ITEMS                                         POSITIONS    
                                                                               
     1.   NNHSF ID                                                    10-16    
                                                                               
     2.   General                                                              
                                                                               
          a.  Year of death                                             1-2    
          b.  Quality of match                                           17    
          c.  Record type                                                19    
          d.  Resident status                                            20    
          e.  Month of death                                          55-56    
          f.  Day of death                                            57-58    
                                                                               
     3.   Occurrence                                                           
                                                                               
          a.  Region                                                     26    
          b.  Division                                                   27    
          c.  Population size of county of occurrence                    49    
          d.  Place of death -- hospital and status/                           
                                decedent's status                        75    
                                                                               
     4.   Residence                                                            
                                                                               
          a.  Population size of city of residence                       39    
          b.  Metropolitan/nonmetropolitan county                        40    
          c.  Region                                                     41    
          d.  Division                                                   42    
          e.  Population size of county of residence                     50    
          f.  Population size of SMSA/PMSA/MSA                           51    
                                                                               
     5.   The Decedent                                                         
                                                                               
          a.  Education                                               52-54    
          b.  Sex                                                        59    
          c.  Race                                                    60-63    
          d.  Age                                                     64-72    
          e.  Marital Status                                             77    
          f.  origin or descent                                       80-81    
          g.  Source for age at  death                                  114    
                                                                               
     6.   Underlying Cause                                                     
                                                                               
          a.  Autopsy performed                                          84    
          b.  Place of accident for causes E850-E929                    141    
          c.  52 cause recode                                         91-93    
          d.  ICD-9 code                                            142-145    
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 22                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
          e.  282 cause recode                                      146-150    
          e.  72 cause recode                                       151-153    
          f.  34 cause recode                                       157-159    
                                                                               
     7.   Multiple Conditions                                                  
                                                                               
          a.  Entity-Axis conditions                                           
                                                                               
              1.  Number of                                        160-161     
              2.  The conditions                                   162-301     
                                                                               
          b.  Record-Axis conditions                                           
                                                                               
              1.  Number of                                        338-339     
              2.  The conditions                                   341-440     
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 23    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
              NNHSF MORTALITY PUBLIC USE DATA TAPE DOCUMENTATION               
                                                                               
                                                                               
          TAPE   FIELD                                                         
          POS.   SIZE    VARIABLE DESCRIPTION AND CODES                        
                                                                               
           1-2      2    Year of Death                                         
                                                                               
                           84-90      ... Year of death (1984-1990)            
                                                                               
                           (Note: Month and Day of Death are stored in tape    
                           locations 55-56 and 57-58, respectively.)           
                                                                               
                                                                               
           3-9      7    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
         10-16      7    NNHSF ID *                                            
                                                                               
                                                                               
            17      1    Quality of Match *                                    
                                                                               
                           (Note: Records where all NNHSF data match NDI       
                           data were considered exact matches.  Records        
                           were also accepted as matches if they met the       
                           criteria of the NNHSF scoring algorithm.            
                           However, in some cases the multiple cause dates     
                           of death conflicted with information received       
                           in the NNHSF interviews but met the scoring         
                           algorithm.  We therefore included them in           
                           the file.  These cases can be identified by         
                           the user.)                                          
                                                                               
                           1          ... Exact NDI match                      
                           2          ... Not an exact NDI match but selected  
                           3          ... Meets the criteria of the NNHSF      
                                          scoring algorithm but contains       
                                          conflicting dates                    
                                                                               
                                                                               
            18      1    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
     ______________________________                                            
        * indicates that the variable was generated from NNHSF data.  All      
     other variables are extracted directly from the NCHS multiple cause-      
     of-death file.                                                            
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 24                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
            19      1    Record Type                                           
                                                                               
                           1          ... RESIDENT (where subject lived)       
                                          State and County of occurrence and   
                                          Residence are the same.              
                           2          ... NONRESIDENT (place of death)         
                                          State and/or County of Occurrence and
                                          Residence are different.             
                                                                               
                                                                               
            20      1    Resident Status                                       
                                                                               
                           1          ... RESIDENT                             
                                          State and County of occurrence       
                                          and Residence are the same.          
                           2          ... INTRASTATE NONRESIDENT               
                                          State of Occurrence and Residence    
                                          are the same, but County is          
                                          different.                           
                           3          ... INTERSTATE NONRESIDENT               
                                          State of Occurrence and Residence    
                                          are different, but both are in       
                                          the U.S.                             
                           4          ... FOREIGN RESIDENT (OCCURRENCE IS      
                                          IN THE U.S.)                         
                                          State of Occurrence is one of the    
                                          50 States or the District of         
                                          Columbia, but Place of Residence     
                                          is outside of the U.S.               
                           Blank      ... PLACE OF OCCURRENCE IS OUTSIDE       
                                          THE U.S.                             
                                                                               
                                                                               
         21-25      5    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
         26-27      2    Region and Division of Occurrence of Death            
                                                                               
                           Divisions are coded within Regions and States       
                           are coded within Divisions.  Location 26 is         
                           Region.  Location 27 is Division.                   
                                                                               
                           Loc.  Loc.                                          
                           26    27                                            
                                                                               
                           0     0    ... OCCURRENCE IS OUTSIDE THE U.S.       
                           1          ... NORTHEAST                            
                                 1    ...   New England                        
                                      ...     Maine                            
                                      ...     New Hampshire                    
                                      ...     Vermont                          
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 25    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                      ...     Massachusetts                    
                                      ...     Rhode Island                     
                                      ...     Connecticut                      
                                 2    ...   Middle Atlantic                    
                                      ...     New York                         
                                      ...     New Jersey                       
                                      ...     Pennsylvania                     
                           2          ... MIDWEST                              
                                 3    ...   East North Central                 
                                      ...     Ohio                             
                                      ...     Indiana                          
                                      ...     Illinois                         
                                      ...     Michigan                         
                                      ...     Wisconsin                        
                                 4    ...   West North Central                 
                                      ...     Minnesota                        
                                      ...     Iowa                             
                                      ...     Missouri                         
                                      ...     North Dakota                     
                                      ...     South Dakota                     
                                      ...     Nebraska                         
                                      ...     Kansas                           
                           3          ... SOUTH                                
                                 5    ...   South Atlantic                     
                                      ...     Delaware                         
                                      ...     Maryland                         
                                      ...     District of Columbia             
                                      ...     Virginia                         
                                      ...     West Virginia                    
                                      ...     North Carolina                   
                                      ...     South Carolina                   
                                      ...     Georgia                          
                                      ...     Florida                          
                                 6    ...   East South Central                 
                                      ...     Kentucky                         
                                      ...     Tennessee                        
                                      ...     Alabama                          
                                      ...     Mississippi                      
                                 7    ...   West South Central                 
                                      ...     Arkansas                         
                                      ...     Louisiana                        
                                      ...     Oklahoma                         
                                      ...     Texas                            
                           4          ... WEST                                 
                                 8    ...   Mountain                           
                                      ...     Montana                          
                                      ...     Idaho                            
                                      ...     Wyoming                          
                                      ...     Colorado                         
                                      ...     New Mexico                       
                                      ...     Arizona                          
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 26                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                      ...     Utah                             
                                      ...     Nevada                           
                                 9    ...   Pacific                            
                                      ...     Washington                       
                                      ...     Oregon                           
                                      ...     California                       
                                      ...     Alaska                           
                                      ...     Hawaii                           
                                                                               
                                                                               
         28-38     11    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
            39      1    Population Size of City of Residence                  
                                                                               
                           0          ... Place of 1,000,000 or more persons   
                           1          ... Place of 500,000 to 1,000,000        
                                          persons                              
                           2          ... Place of 250,000 to 500,000          
                                          persons                              
                           3          ... Place of 100,000 to 250,000          
                                          persons                              
                           4          ... Place of 50,000 to 100,000           
                                          persons                              
                           5          ... Place of 25,000 to 50,000 persons    
                           6          ... Place of 10,000 to 25,000 persons    
                           9          ... All other areas in the U.S. or       
                                          unknown                              
                           Z          ... Foreign resident                     
                                                                               
                                                                               
            40      1    Metropolitan - Nonmetropolitan County of Residence    
                                                                               
                           1          ... Metropolitan county                  
                           2          ... Nonmetropolitan county               
                           Z          ... Foreign resident                     
                           9          ... Unknown                              
                                                                               
                                                                               
         41-42      2    Region and Division of Residence                      
                                                                               
                           Divisions are coded within Regions and States       
                           are codeded within Divisions.  Location 41 is       
                           Region.  Location 42 is Division.                   
                                                                               
                           Loc.  Loc.                                          
                           41    42                                            
                                                                               
                           0     0    ... FOREIGN RESIDENT                     
                           1          ... NORTHEAST                            
                                 1    ...   New England                        
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 27    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                      ...     Maine                            
                                      ...     New Hampshire                    
                                      ...     Vermont                          
                                      ...     Massachusetts                    
                                      ...     Rhode Island                     
                                      ...     Connecticut                      
                                 2    ...   Middle Atlantic                    
                                      ...     New York                         
                                      ...     New Jersey                       
                                      ...     Pennsylvania                     
                           2          ... MIDWEST                              
                                 3    ...   East North Central                 
                                      ...     Ohio                             
                                      ...     Indiana                          
                                      ...     Illinois                         
                                      ...     Michigan                         
                                      ...     Wisconsin                        
                                 4    ...   West North Central                 
                                      ...     Minnesota                        
                                      ...     Iowa                             
                                      ...     Missouri                         
                                      ...     North Dakota                     
                                      ...     South Dakota                     
                                      ...     Nebraska                         
                                      ...     Kansas                           
                           3          ... SOUTH                                
                                 5    ...   South Atlantic                     
                                      ...     Delaware                         
                                      ...     Maryland                         
                                      ...     District of Columbia             
                                      ...     Virginia                         
                                      ...     West Virginia                    
                                      ...     North Carolina                   
                                      ...     South Carolina                   
                                      ...     Georgia                          
                                      ...     Florida                          
                                 6    ...   East South Central                 
                                      ...     Kentucky                         
                                      ...     Tennessee                        
                                      ...     Alabama                          
                                      ...     Mississippi                      
                                 7    ...   West South Central                 
                                      ...     Arkansas                         
                                      ...     Louisiana                        
                                      ...     Oklahoma                         
                                      ...     Texas                            
                           4          ... WEST                                 
                                 8    ...   Mountain                           
                                      ...     Montana                          
                                      ...     Idaho                            
                                      ...     Wyoming                          
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 28                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                      ...     Colorado                         
                                      ...     New Mexico                       
                                      ...     Arizona                          
                                      ...     Utah                             
                                      ...     Nevada                           
                                 9    ...   Pacific                            
                                      ...     Washington                       
                                      ...     Oregon                           
                                      ...     California                       
                                      ...     Alaska                           
                                      ...     Hawaii                           
                                                                               
                                                                               
         43-48      6    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
            49      1    Population Size of County of Occurrence               
                                                                               
                           Based on the results of the 1980 Census             
                                                                               
                           0          ... County of 1,000,000 or more          
                           1          ... County of 500,000 to 1,000,000       
                           2          ... County of 250,000 to 500,000         
                           3          ... County of 100,000 to 250,000         
                           9          ... County of less than 100,000          
                                                                               
                           (Note: This information is available only for       
                           1989 and later.  For earlier years, the field       
                           will be blank.)                                     
                                                                               
                                                                               
            50      1    Population Size of County of Residence                
                                                                               
                           Based on the results of the 1980 Census             
                                                                               
                           0          ... County of 1,000,000 or more          
                           1          ... County of 500,000 to 1,000,000       
                           2          ... County of 250,000 to 500,000         
                           3          ... County of 100,000 to 250,000         
                           9          ... County of less than 100,000          
                           Z          ... Foreign resident                     
                                                                               
                           (Note: This information is only available for       
                           1989 and later.  For earlier years, the field       
                           will be blank.)                                     
                                                                               
          (51)      1    SPECIAL INSTRUCTION: For deaths occurring in          
                         1989 use definition (a).  For deaths occurring        
                         in 1990 or later, use definition (b).  For            
                         deaths occurring in 1988 and earlier, the field       
                         will be left blank.  The two definitions are a        
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 29    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                         result of a change in coding rules.                   
                                                                               
            51      1    (a) Population Size of SMSA                           
                                                                               
                           Based on the results of the 1980 Census             
                                                                               
                           1          ... SMSA of 250,000 or more              
                           2          ... SMSA of 100,000 to 250,000           
                           3          ... SMSA of less than 100,000            
                           9          ... Nonmetropolitan area                 
                           Z          ... Foreign resident                     
                                                                               
                         (b) Population Size of PMSA/MSA                       
                                                                               
                           Based on 1990  Census county population counts      
                                                                               
                           1          ... Area of 250,000 or more              
                           2          ... Area of 100,000 to 250,000           
                           3          ... Area of less than 100,000            
                           9          ... Nonmetropolitan area                 
                           Z          ... Foreign resident                     
                                                                               
                                                                               
         52-53      2    Education                                             
                                                                               
                           00         ... No formal education                  
                           01-08      ... Years of elementary school           
                           09         ... 1 year of high school                
                           10         ... 2 years of high school               
                           11         ... 3 years of high school               
                           12         ... 4 years of high school               
                           13         ... 1 year of college                    
                           14         ... 2 years of college                   
                           15         ... 3 years of college                   
                           16         ... 4 years of college                   
                           17         ... 5 or more years of college           
                           99         ... Not stated                           
                                                                               
                           (Note: This information is only available for       
                           1989 and later.  For earlier years, the field       
                           will be blank.)                                     
                                                                               
                                                                               
            54      1    Education Recode                                      
                                                                               
                           1          ... 0 - 8 years                          
                           2          ... 9 - 11 years                         
                           3          ... 12 years                             
                           4          ... 13 - 15 years                        
                           5          ... 16 years or more                     
                           6          ... Not stated                           
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 30                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                           (Note: This information is only available for       
                           1989 and later.  For earlier years, the field       
                           will be blank.)                                     
                                                                               
                                                                               
       (55-58)      4    DATE OF DEATH                                         
                                                                               
                           (Note: Year of Death is given in tape locations     
                           1-2.)                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
         55-56      2    Month                                                 
                                                                               
                           01         ... January                              
                           02         ... February                             
                           03         ... March                                
                           04         ... April                                
                           05         ... May                                  
                           06         ... June                                 
                           07         ... July                                 
                           08         ... August                               
                           09         ... September                            
                           10         ... October                              
                           11         ... November                             
                           12         ... December                             
                                                                               
                                                                               
         57-58      2    Day                                                   
                                                                               
                           01-31      ... As applicable to Month of Death      
                           99         ... Not stated                           
                                                                               
                                                                               
            59      1    Sex *                                                 
                                                                               
                           1          ... Male                                 
                           2          ... Female                               
                                                                               
                           (Note: Sex is taken from the 1985 NNHS baseline     
                           data.)                                              
                                                                               
                                                                               
       (60-63)      4    RACE                                                  
                                                                               
                                                                               
         60-61      2    Detail Race                                           
                                                                               
                           01         ... White                                
                           02         ... Black                                
                           03         ... American Indian (includes Aleuts     
                                          and Eskimos)                         
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 31    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                           04         ... Chinese                              
                           05         ... Japanese                             
                           06         ... Hawaiian (includes Part-Hawaiian)    
                           07         ... Filipino                             
                           08         ... Other Asian or Pacific Islander      
                           09         ... All other races                      
                                                                               
                           (Note: Detail Race is coded according to the        
                           1989 Detail Race coding structure.)                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
            62      1    Race Recode #1                                        
                                                                               
                           1          ... White                                
                           2          ... Races other than white or black      
                           3          ... Black                                
                                                                               
                                                                               
            63      1    Race Recode #2                                        
                                                                               
                           1          ... White                                
                           2          ... All other races                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       (64-72)      9    AGE AT DEATH *                                        
                                                                               
                           (Note: For subjects where an acceptable             
                           birthdate was collected at the NNHS baseline,       
                           the age at death is calculated using the            
                           baseline data.  For subjects where no               
                           acceptable birthdate is available, age at           
                           death is taken from the multiple Cause Record.      
                           Position 114 indicates the source of this age.)     
                                                                               
                                                                               
         64-66      3    Detail Age at Death *                                 
                                                                               
                           022-109    ... Age in years (not inclusive)         
                                                                               
                                                                               
         67-68      2    Age of Death Recode #1 *                              
                                                                               
                           30         ... 20 - 24 years                        
                           31         ... 25 - 29 years                        
                           32         ... 30 - 34 years                        
                           33         ... 35 - 39 years                        
                           34         ... 40 - 44 years                        
                           35         ... 45 - 49 years                        
                           36         ... 50 - 54 years                        
                           37         ... 55 - 59 years                        
                           38         ... 60 - 64 years                        
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 32                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                           39         ... 65 - 69 years                        
                           40         ... 70 - 74 years                        
                           41         ... 75 - 79 years                        
                           42         ... 80 - 84 years                        
                           43         ... 85 - 89 years                        
                           44         ... 90 - 94 years                        
                           45         ... 95 - 99 years                        
                           46         ... 100 - 104 years                      
                           47         ... 105 - 109 years                      
                           48         ... 110 - 114 years                      
                           49         ... 115 - 119 years                      
                           50         ... 120 - 124 years                      
                           51         ... 125 years and over                   
                                                                               
                                                                               
         69-70      2    Age of Death Recode #2 *                              
                                                                               
                           10         ... 20 - 24 years                        
                           11         ... 25 - 29 years                        
                           12         ... 30 - 34 years                        
                           13         ... 35 - 39 years                        
                           14         ... 40 - 44 years                        
                           15         ... 45 - 49 years                        
                           16         ... 50 - 54 years                        
                           17         ... 55 - 59 years                        
                           18         ... 60 - 64 years                        
                           19         ... 65 - 69 years                        
                           20         ... 70 - 74 years                        
                           21         ... 75 - 79 years                        
                           22         ... 80 - 84 years                        
                           23         ... 85 - 89 years                        
                           24         ... 90 - 94 years                        
                           25         ... 95 - 99 years                        
                           26         ... 100 years and over                   
                                                                               
                                                                               
         71-72      2    Age of Death Recode #3 *                              
                                                                               
                           04         ... 15 - 24 years                        
                           05         ... 25 - 34 years                        
                           06         ... 35 - 44 years                        
                           07         ... 45 - 54 years                        
                           08         ... 55 - 64 years                        
                           09         ... 65 - 74 years                        
                           10         ... 75 - 84 years                        
                           11         ... 85 years and over                    
                                                                               
                                                                               
         73-74      2    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 33    
                                                                               
                                                                               
          (75)           SPECIAL INSTRUCTION: for deaths occurring in 1988     
                         and earlier, use definition (a).  For deaths          
                         occurring in 1989 and later, use definition (b).      
                         The two definitions are a result of a change in       
                         coding rules.                                         
                                                                               
            75      1    (a) Place of Death -- Hospital and Status             
                                                                               
                           1          ... Hospital, clinic or medical          
                                          center - Inpatient                   
                           2          ... Hospital, clinic or medical          
                                          center - Outpatient or admitted      
                                          to emergency room                    
                           3          ... Hospital, clinic or medical          
                                          center - Dead on arrival             
                           4          ... Hospital, clinic or medical          
                                          center - Patient status unknown      
                           5          ... Hospital, clinic or medical          
                                          center - Patient status not on       
                                          certificate                          
                           6          ... Other institutions providing         
                                          patient care                         
                           7          ... All other reported entries           
                           8          ... Dead on arrival - Hospital,          
                                          clinic or medical center name        
                                          not given                            
                           9          ... Hospital and patient status not      
                                          stated                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                         (b) Place of Death -- Decedent's Status               
                                                                               
                           1          ... Hospital, clinic or medical          
                                          center - Inpatient                   
                           2          ... Hospital, clinic or medical          
                                          center - Outpatient or admitted      
                                          to emergency room                    
                           3          ... Hospital, clinic or medical          
                                          center - Dead on arrival             
                           4          ... Hospital, clinic or medical          
                                          center - Patient status unknown      
                           5          ... Nursing home                         
                           6          ... Residence                            
                           7          ... Other                                
                           9          ... Place of death unknown               
                                                                               
                                                                               
            76           Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
            77      1    Marital Status                                        
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 34                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                           1          ... Never married, single                
                           2          ... Married                              
                           3          ... widowed                              
                           4          ... Divorced                             
                           8          ... Marital status not on certificate    
                           9          ... Marital status not stated            
                                                                               
                                                                               
         78-79      2    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
       (80-81)      2    SPECIAL INSTRUCTION: For deaths occurring in 1989     
                         or earlier, use definition (a).  For deaths           
                         occurring in 1990 or later, use definition (b).       
                         The two definitions are a result of a change in       
                         coding rules.                                         
                                                                               
         80-81      2    (a) Origin or Descent                                 
                                                                               
                           00         ... Non-Spanish                          
                           01         ... Mexican                              
                           02         ... Puerto Rican                         
                           03         ... Cuban                                
                           04         ... Central or South American            
                           05         ... Other or Unknown Spanish             
                           06         ... American                             
                           07         ... American Indian                      
                           08         ... British, Scottish, Welsh, Scotch-    
                                          Irish                                
                           09         ... Irish                                
                           10         ... German                               
                           11         ... French                               
                           12         ... Norwegian, Swedish, Danish           
                           13         ... Polish                               
                           14         ... Italian                              
                           15         ... Other North, Central, and South      
                                          American                             
                           16         ... Other Western European               
                           17         ... Other Northern European              
                           18         ... Other Eastern European               
                           19         ... Other Southern European (excluding   
                                          Spain)                               
                           20         ... Southeast Asian and Pacific          
                                          Islander                             
                           21         ... South Central Asian                  
                           22         ... Other Asian                          
                           23         ... North African                        
                           24         ... Other African                        
                           88         ... Not reported                         
                           99         ... Not classifiable                     
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 35    
                                                                               
                                                                               
         80-81           (b) Origin or Descent                                 
                                                                               
                           00         ... Non-Hispanic                         
                           01         ... Mexican                              
                           02         ... Puerto Rican                         
                           03         ... Cuban                                
                           04         ... Central or South American            
                           05         ... Other or Unknown Hispanic            
                           99         ... Unknown                              
                                                                               
                                                                               
         82-83      2    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
            84      1    Autopsy Performed                                     
                                                                               
                           1          ... Yes                                  
                           2          ... No                                   
                           8          ... Item "Autopsy performed" not on      
                                          certificate                          
                           9          ... Item "Autopsy performed" left        
                                          blank                                
                                                                               
                                                                               
         85-90      6    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
         91-93      3    52 Cause Recode                                       
                                                                               
                           A recode of the cause code into 52 groups           
                           designed for use in producing tabulations.          
                           Appendix 1 contains a complete list of recodes      
                           and categories.                                     
                                                                               
                           010-560    ... Code range (not inclusive)           
                                                                               
                                                                               
        94-113     20    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
           114      1    Source for Age at Death                               
                                                                               
                           1          ... Age is calculated from the           
                                          baseline data.                       
                           2          ... Age is taken from the Multiple       
                                          Cause Record.                        
                                                                               
       115-140     26    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
           141      1    Place of Accident for Causes E850-E929                
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 36                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                           0          ... Home                                 
                           1          ... Farm                                 
                           2          ... Mine and quarry                      
                           3          ... Industrial place and premises        
                           4          ... Place for recreation and sports      
                           5          ... Street and highway                   
                           6          ... Public building                      
                           7          ... Resident institution                 
                           8          ... Other specified place                
                           9          ... Place of accident not specified      
                           Blank      ... Causes other than E850-E929          
                                                                               
                                                                               
     (142-159)     18    UNDERLYING CAUSE OF DEATH                             
                                                                               
                                                                               
       142-145      4    ICD Code (9th Revision)                               
                                                                               
                           See the MANUAL OF THE INTERNATIONAL STATISTICAL     
                           CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES, INJURIES, AND CAUSES    
                           OF DEATH: BASED ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE       
                           NINTH REVISION CONFERENCE, 1975, AND ADOPTED BY     
                           THE TWENTY-NINTH WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY, VOLUME      
                           1, 1977 (World Health Organization).  For           
                           injuries and poisonings, the external cause is      
                           coded (E800-E999) rather than the Nature of         
                           Injury (800-999).  These positions do not           
                           include the letter E for the external cause of      
                           injury.  For those causes that do not have a        
                           4th digit, location 145 is blank.                   
                                                                               
                                                                               
       146-150      5    Cause-of-Death Recode -- 282 Groups                   
                                                                               
                           A recode of the ICD-9 cause-of-death code into      
                           282 groups for NCHS publications.  See Appendix     
                           2 for a complete list of recodes and the causes     
                           included.                                           
                                                                               
                           00100-35800 ... Code range (not inclusive)          
                                                                               
                                                                               
       151-153      3    Cause-of-Death Recode -- 72 Groups                    
                                                                               
                           A recode of the ICD-9 cause-of-death code into      
                           72 groups for NCHS publications.  See Appendix      
                           3 for a complete list of recodes and the causes     
                           included.                                           
                                                                               
                           010-840    ... Code range (not inclusive)           
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 37    
                                                                               
                                                                               
       154-156      3    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
       157-159      3    Cause-of-Death Recode -- 34 Groups                    
                                                                               
                           A recode of the ICD-9 cause code into 34 groups     
                           for NCHS publications.  See Appendix 4 for a        
                           complete list of recodes and the causes included.   
                                                                               
                           010-370    ... Code range (not inclusive)           
                                                                               
                                                                               
     (160-440)    281    MULTIPLE CONDITIONS                                   
                                                                               
                                                                               
       160-161      2    Number of Entity-Axis Conditions                      
                                                                               
                           00-20      ... Code range (not inclusive)           
                                                                               
                                                                               
       162-301    140    ENTITY - AXIS CONDITIONS                              
                                                                               
                           Space has been provided for maximum of 20           
                           conditions.  Each condition takes 7 positions       
                           in the record.  Records that do not have 20         
                           conditions are blank in the unused area.            
                                                                               
                           Position 1:      Part/line  number on certificate   
                                            1    ... Part I, line 1 (a)        
                                            2    ... Part I, line 2 (b)        
                                            3    ... Part I, line 3 (c)        
                                            4    ... Part I, line 4 (d)        
                                            5    ... Part I, line 5 (e)        
                                            6    ... Part II                   
                                                                               
                           Position 2:      Sequence of condition within       
                                            part/line                          
                                                                               
                                            1-9  ... Code range                
                                                                               
                           Positions 3 - 6: ICD-9 condition code               
                                                                               
                                            See the MANUAL OF THE INTER-       
                                            NATIONAL STATISTICAL CLASSIFI-     
                                            CATION OF DISEASES, INJURIES,      
                                            AND CAUSES OF DEATH: BASED ON      
                                            THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE         
                                            NINTH REVISION CONFERENCE, 1975,   
                                            AND ADOPTED BY THE TWENTY-NINTH    
                                            WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY, VOLUME      
                                            1, 1977 (World Health Organiza-    
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 38                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                            tion) for a complete list of       
                                            codes.                             
                                                                               
                           Position 7:      Nature of Injury Flag              
                                                                               
                                            1    ... Indicates that the        
                                                     code in positions 3-6     
                                                     is a Nature of Injury     
                                                     code                      
                                            0    ... All other codes           
                                                                               
                                                                               
       162-168      7      1st Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       169-175      7      2nd Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       176-182      7      3rd Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       183-189      7      4th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       190-196      7      5th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       197-203      7      6th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       204-210      7      7th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       211-217      7      8th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       218-224      7      9th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       225-231      7      10th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       232-238      7      11th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       239-245      7      12th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       246-252      7      13th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 39    
                                                                               
                                                                               
       253-259      7      14th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       260-266      7      15th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       267-273      7      16th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       274-280      7      17th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       281-287      7      18th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       288-294      7      19th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       295-301      7      20th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       302-337     36    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
       338-339      2    Number of Record-Axis Conditions                      
                                                                               
                           00-20      ... Code range (not inclusive)           
                                                                               
                                                                               
           340      1    Blank                                                 
                                                                               
                                                                               
     (341-440)    100    RECORD - AXIS CONDITIONS                              
                                                                               
                           Space has been provided for a maximum of 20         
                           conditions.  Each condition takes 5 positions       
                           in the record.  Records that do not have 20         
                           conditions are blank in the unused area.            
                                                                               
                           Positions 1 - 4: ICD-9 condition code               
                                                                               
                                            See the MANUAL OF THE INTER-       
                                            NATIONAL STATISTICAL CLASSIFICA-   
                                            TION OF DISEASES, INJURIES, AND    
                                            CAUSES OF DEATH: BASED ON THE      
                                            RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE NINTH       
                                            REVISION CONFERENCE, 1975, AND     
                                            ADOPTED BY THE TWENTY-NINTH        
                                            WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY, VOLUME      
                                            1, 1977 (World Health Organiza-    
                                            tion) for a complete list of       
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 40                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                            codes.                             
                                                                               
                           Position 5:      Nature of Injury Flag              
                                                                               
                                            1    ... Indicates that the        
                                                     code in positions 1-4     
                                                     is a Nature of Injury     
                                                     code                      
                                           0     ... All other codes           
                                                                               
       341-345      5      1st Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       346-350      5      2nd Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       351-355      5      3rd Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       356-360      5      4th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       361-365      5      5th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       366-370      5      6th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       371-375      5      7th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       376-380      5      8th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       381-385      5      9th Condition                                       
                                                                               
                                                                               
       386-390      5      10th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       391-395      5      11th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       396-400      5      12th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       401-405      5      13th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       406-410      5      14th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 41    
                                                                               
                                                                               
       411-415      5      15th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       416-420      5      16th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       421-425      5      17th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       426-430      5      18th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       431-435      5      19th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                               
       436-440      5      20th Condition                                      
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 42                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 43    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                  APPENDIX 1                                   
                                                                               
           NINTH REVISION 52 CAUSES OF DEATH ADAPTED FOR USE BY DVS            
                                                                               
                                                                               
     ST: 1 = Subtotal          Limited: Sex: 1 = Males; 2 = Females            
     Length = of Cause Title            Age: 1 = 5 & Over; 2 = 10-54;          
                                             3 = 28 Days & Over                
                                                                               
         *****  Cause Subtotals are not Identified in this File *****          
                                                                               
       52     S  Limited  Len-                                                 
     Recode   T  Sex Age  gth  Cause Title And ICD-9 Codes Included            
                                                                               
        010               050  Tuberculosis, including late effects (010-      
                                    018, 137)                                  
        020           3   016  Septicemia (038)                                
        030   1           089  Malignant neoplasms, including neoplasms of     
                                    lymphatic and hematopoietic tissues        
                                    (140-208)                                  
        040               064    Malignant neoplasms of lip, oral cavity,      
                                    and pharynx (140-149)                      
        050               039    Malignant neoplasm of esophagus (150)         
        060               037    Malignant neoplasm of stomach (151)           
        070               035    Malignant neoplasm of colon (153)             
        080               070    Malignant neoplasms of rectum, rectosigmoid   
                                    junction, and anus (154)                   
        090               064    Malignant neoplasms of liver and intra-       
                                    hepatic bile ducts (155)                   
        100               070    Malignant neoplasms of gallbladder and        
                                    extrahepatic bile ducts (156)              
        110               038    Malignant neoplasm of pancreas (157)          
        120               036    Malignant neoplasm of larynx (161)            
        130               058    Malignant neoplasms of trachea, bronchus,     
                                    and lung (162)                             
        140               036    Malignant neoplasm of pleura (163)            
        150               059    Malignant neoplasms of bone and articular     
                                    cartilage (170)                            
        160               063    Malignant neoplasms of connective and         
                                    other soft tissue (171)                    
        170               034    Malignant melanoma of skin (172)              
        180       2       043    Malignant neoplasm of female breast (174)     
        190       2       042    Malignant neoplasm of cervix uteri (180)      
        200       2       044    Malignant neoplasm of body of uterus (182)    
        210       2       061    Malignant neoplasms of ovary and other        
                                    uterine adnexa (183)                       
        220       1       038    Malignant neoplasm of prostate (185)          
        230       1       036    Malignant neoplasm of testis (186)            
        240               037    Malignant neoplasm of bladder (188)           
        250               078    Malignant neoplasms of kidney and other       
                                    and unspecified urinary organs (189)       
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 44                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
        260               090    Malignant neoplasms of brain and other and    
                                    unspecified parts of nervous system        
                                    (191-192)                                  
        270               025    Hodgkin's disease (201)                       
        280               059    Malignant lymphoma other than Hodgkin's       
                                    disease (200, 202)                         
        290               058    Multiple myeloma and immunoproliferative      
                                    neoplasms (203)                            
        300               020    Leukemia (204-208)                            
        310               149    All other malignant neoplasms, including      
                                    neoplasms of lymphatic and hematopoietic   
                                    tissues (152, 158-160, 164-165, 173,       
                                    175, 179, 181, 184, 187, 190, 193-199)     
        320               023  Diabetes mellitus (250)                         
        330               021  Aplastic anemia (284)                           
        340   1           039  Diseases of heart (390-398, 402, 404-429)       
        350               034    Hypertensive heart disease (402)              
        360               044    Hypertensive heart and renal disease (404)    
        370   1           034    Ischemic heart disease (410-414)              
        380               037      Acute myocardial infarction (410)           
        390               046      All other ischemic heart disease (411-414)  
        400               047    All other diseases of heart (390-398, 415-    
                                    429)                                       
        410               052  Hypertension with or without renal disease      
                                    (401, 403)                                 
        420               034  Cerebrovascular diseases (430-438)              
        430               021  Atherosclerosis (440)                           
        440               033  Pneumonia and influenza (480-487)               
        450               070  Chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases and      
                                    allied conditions (490-496)                
        460               072  Pneumoconioses and pneumopathy due to           
                                    inhalation of other oust (500-505)         
        470               039  Ulcer of stomach and duodenum (531-533)         
        480               041  Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis (571)       
        490               054  Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and nephrosis    
                                    (580-589)                                  
        500   1           041  Accidents and adverse effects (E800-E949)       
        510               037    Motor vehicle accidents (E810-E825)           
        520               079    Accidents mainly of industrial                
                                    type (E846, E881-E882, E916-E919, E921,    
                                    E923-E926)                                 
        530               099    Other accidents and adverse                   
                                    effects (E800-E807, E826-E845, E847-       
                                    E880, E883-E915, E920, E922, E927-E949)    
        540           1   019  Suicide (E950-E959)                             
        550               043  Homicide and legal intervention (E960-E978)     
        560               049  All other diseases and external causes          
                                    (Residual)                                 
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 45    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                  APPENDIX 2                                   
                                                                               
           NINTH REVISION 282 CAUSES OF DEATH ADAPTED FOR USE BY DVS           
                                                                               
                                                                               
     ST: 1 = Subtotal          Limited: Sex: 1 = Males; 2 = Females            
     Length = of Cause Title            Age: 1 = 5 & Over; 2 = 10-54;          
                                             3 = 28 Days & Over                
                                                                               
         *****  Cause Subtotals are not Identified in this File *****          
                                                                               
      282     S  Limited  Len-                                                 
     Recode   T  Sex Age  gth  Cause Title And ICD-9 Codes Included            
                                                                               
      00100   1           057       I. Infectious and parasitic diseases       
                                       (001-139)                               
                                                                               
      00200   1           040  Intestinal infectious diseases (001-009)        
      00300               054    Cholera and typhoid and paratyphoid fevers    
                                    (001-002)                                  
      00400               019    Shigellosis (004)                             
      00500               076    Other salmonella infections and other food    
                                    poisoning (bacterial) (003, 005)           
      00600               017    Amebiasis (006)                               
      00700               066    Intestinal infections due to other            
                                    specified organisms (007-008)              
      00800               041    Ill-defined intestinal infections (009)       
      00900   1           022  Tuberculosis (010-018)                          
      01000               046    Tuberculosis of respiratory system (010-      
                                    012)                                       
      01100               030    Other tuberculosis (013-018)                  
      01200   1           047  Zoonotic and other bacterial diseases (020-     
                                    041)                                       
      01300               019    Brucellosis (023)                             
      01400               018    Diphtheria (032)                              
      01500               022    Whooping cough (033)                          
      01600               065    Streptococcal sore throat, scarlatina, and    
                                    erysipelas (034-035)                       
      01700               031    Meningococcal infection (036)                 
      01800               015    Tetanus (037)                                 
      01900           3   018    Septicemia (038)                              
      02000               056    All other bacterial diseases (020-022,        
                                    024-031, 039-041)                          
                                                                               
      02100   1           024  Viral diseases (045-079)                        
      02200               027    Acute poliomyelitis (045)                     
      02300               016    Smallpox (050)                                
      02400               015    Measles (055)                                 
      02500               015    Rubella (056)                                 
      02600               040    Arthropod-borne encephalitis (062-064)        
      02700               023    Viral hepatitis (070)                         
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 46                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
      02800               064    Other viral diseases (046-049, 051-054,       
                                    057-061, 065-066, 071-079)                 
      02900   1           058  Rickettsioses and other arthropod-borne         
                                    diseases (080-088)                         
      03000               042    Typhus and other rickettsioses (080-083)      
      03100               015    Malaria (084)                                 
      03200               046    All other arthropod-borne diseases (085-088)  
      03300   1           046  Syphilis and other venereal diseases (080-099)  
      03400   1           020    Syphilis (090-097)                            
      03500               033      Cardiovascular syphilis (093)               
      03600               023      Neurosyphilis (094)                         
      03700               040      All other syphilis (090-091, 095-097)       
      03800               029    Gonococcal infections (098)                   
      03900               031    Other venereal diseases (099)                 
      04000   1           103  Other infectious and parasitic diseases and     
                                    late effects of infectious and             
                                    parasitic diseases (100-139)               
                                                                               
      04100               019    Mycoses (110-118)                             
      04200               025    Helminthiases (120-129)                       
      04300               036    Late effects of tuberculosis (137)            
      04400               043    Late effects of acute poliomyelitis (138)     
      04500               127    All other infectious and parasitic            
                                    diseases and late effects of other         
                                    infectious and parasitic diseases (100-    
                                    104, 130-136, 139)                         
                                                                               
      04600   1           033       II. Neoplasms (140-239)                    
                                                                               
      04700   1           089    Malignant neoplasms, including neoplasms      
                                    of lymphatic and hematopoietic tissues     
                                    (140-208)                                  
      04800   1           064    Malignant neoplasms of lip, oral cavity,      
                                    and pharynx (140-149)                      
      04900               016      Of lip (140)                                
      05000               019      Of tongue (141)                             
      05100               026      Of pharynx (146-149.0)                      
      05200               097      Of other and ill-defined sites within       
                                    the lip, oral cavity, and pharynx (142-    
                                    145, 149.1-149.9)                          
                                                                               
      05300   1           066    Malignant neoplasms of digestive organs       
                                    and peritoneum (150-159)                   
      05400               022      Of esophagus (150)                          
      05500               020      Of stomach (151)                            
      05600               048      Of small intestine, including duodenum      
                                    (152)                                      
      05700   1           018      Of colon (153)                              
      05800               075        Hepatic and splenic flexures and          
                                      transverse colon (153.0-153.1, 153.7)    
      05900               030        Descending colon (153.2)                  
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 47    
                                                                               
                                                                               
      06000               027        Sigmoid colon (153.3)                     
      06100               056        Cecum, appendix, and ascending colon      
                                      (153.4-153.6)                            
      06200               048        Other and colon, unspecified (153.8-      
                                      153.9)                                   
      06300               052      Of rectum, rectosigmoid junction, and       
                                    anus (154)                                 
      06400   1           046      Of liver and intrahepatic bile ducts (155)  
      06500               028        Liver, primary (155.0)                    
      06600               037        Intrahepatic bile ducts (155.1)           
      06700               058        Liver, not specified as primary or        
                                      secondary (155.2)                        
      06800               052      Of gallbladder and extrahepatic bile        
                                    ducts (156)                                
      06900               021      Of pancreas (157)                           
      07000               120      Of retroperitoneum, peritoneum, and         
                                    other and ill-defined sites within         
                                    the digestive organs and peritoneum        
                                    (158-159)                                  
                                                                               
      07100   1           071    Malignant neoplasms of respiratory and        
                                    intrathoracic organs (160-165)             
      07200               019      Of larynx (161)                             
      07300               040      Of trachea, bronchus, and lung (162)        
      07400               107      Of all other and ill-defined sites          
                                    within the respiratory system and          
                                    intrathoracic organs (160, 163-165)        
                                                                               
      07500   1           076    Malignant neoplasms of bone, connective       
                                    tissue, skin, and breast (170-175)         
      07600               041      Of bone and articular cartilage (170)       
      07700               045      Of connective and other soft tissue (171)   
      07800               026      Melanoma of skin (172)                      
      07900               043      Other malignant neoplasms of skin (173)     
      08000       2       026      Of female breast (174)                      
      08100       1       024      Of male breast (175)                        
                                                                               
      08200   1           049    Malignant neoplasms of genital organs         
                                    (179-187)                                  
      08300       2       025      Of cervix uteri (180)                       
      08400       2       042      Of other parts of uterus (179, 181-182)     
      08500       2       043      Of ovary and other uterine adnexa (183)     
      08600       2       056      Of other and unspecified female genital     
                                    organs (184)                               
      08700       1       021      Of prostate (185)                           
      08800       1       019      Of testis (186)                             
      08900       1       048      Of penis and other male genital organs      
                                    (187)                                      
                                                                               
      09000   1           049    Malignant neoplasms of urinary organs         
                                    (188-189)                                  
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 48                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
      09100               020      Of bladder (188)                            
      09200               060      Of kidney and other and unspecified         
                                    urinary organs (189)                       
                                                                               
      09300   1           062    Malignant neoplasms of other and unspec-      
                                    ified sites (190-199)                      
      09400               016      Of eye (190)                                
      09500               018      Of brain (191)                              
      09600               058      Of other and unspecified parts of           
                                    nervous system (192)                       
      09700               080      Of thyroid gland and other endocrine        
                                    glands and related structures (193-194)    
      09800               048      Of all other and unspecified sites          
                                    (195-199)                                  
                                                                               
      09900   1           070    Malignant neoplasms of lymphatic and          
                                    hematopoietic tissues (200-208)            
      10000               043      Lymphosarcoma and reticulosarcoma (200)     
      10100               027      Hodgkin's disease (201)                     
      10200               070      Other malignant neoplasms of lymphoid       
                                    and histiocytic tissue (202)               
      10300               060      Multiple myeloma and immunoproliferative    
                                    neoplasms (203)                            
      10400   1           022      Leukemia (204-208)                          
      10500               029        Lymphoid leukemia (204)                   
      10600               028        Myeloid leukemia (205)                    
      10700               030        Monocytic leukemia (206)                  
      10800               046        Other and unspecified leukemia (207-      
                                      208)                                     
      10900   1           108  Benign neoplasms, carcinoma in situ, and        
                                    neoplasms of uncertain behavior and of     
                                    unspecified nature (210-239)               
      11000   1           028    Benign neoplasms (210-229)                    
      11100       2       038      Of female genital organs (218-221)          
      11200               062      Of eye, brain, and other parts of           
                                    nervous system (224-225)                   
      11300               064      Of all other and unspecified sites          
                                    (210-217, 222-223, 226-229)                
      11400   1           029    Carcinoma in situ (230-234)                   
      11500               044      Of breast and genitourinary system (233)    
      11600               052      Of all other and unspecified sites (230-    
                                    232, 234)                                  
      11700               043    Neoplasms of uncertain behavior (235-238)     
      11800               039    Neoplasms of unspecified nature (239)         
                                                                               
      11900   1           094       III. Endocrine. nutritional, and           
                                         metabolic diseases and                
                                         immunity disorders (240-279)          
                                                                               
      12000   1           073  Endocrine and metabolic diseases and            
                                    immunity disorders (240-259, 270-279)      
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 49    
                                                                               
                                                                               
      12100               038    Disorders of thyroid gland (240-246)          
      12200               025    Diabetes mellitus (250)                       
      12300               069    Disorders of the pituitary gland and its      
                                    hypothalamic control (253)                 
      12400               032    Diseases of thymus gland (254)                
      12500               035    Disorders of adrenal glands (255)             
      12600               025    Cystic fibrosis (277.0)                       
      12700               017    Obesity (278.0)                               
      12800               115    All other endocrine and metabolic diseases    
                                    and immunity disorders (251-252, 256-      
                                    259, 270-276, 277.1-277.9, 278.1-279)      
      12900   1           034  Nutritional deficiencies (260-269)              
      13000               028    Nutritional marasmus (261)                    
      13100               046    Other protein-calorie malnutrition            
                                    (262-263)                                  
      13200               050    All other nutritional deficiencies (260,      
                                    264-269)                                   
                                                                               
      13300   1           067       IV. Diseases of blood and blood-forming    
                                        organs (280-289)                       
                                                                               
      13400   1           017  Anemias (280-265)                               
      13500               030    Deficiency anemias (280-281)                  
      13600               029    Hemolytic anemias (282-283)                   
      13700               023    Aplastic anemia (284)                         
      13800               037    Other and unspecified anemias (285)           
      13900               046  Purpura and other hemorrhagic conditions        
                                    (287)                                      
      14000               066  All other diseases of blood and blood-          
                                    forming organs (286, 288-289)              
                                                                               
      14100   1           040       V. Mental disorders (290-319)              
                                                                               
      14200               055  Senile and presenile organic psychotic          
                                    conditions (290)                           
      14300               025  Alcoholic psychoses (291)                       
      14400               029  All other psychoses (292-299)                   
      14500               033  Alcohol dependence syndrome (303)               
      14600               021  Drug dependence (304)                           
      14700               080  Other neurotic, personality, and nonpsy-        
                                    chotic mental disorders (300-302,          
                                    305-316)                                   
      14800               028  Mental retardation (317-319)                    
                                                                               
      14900   1           072       VI. Diseases of the nervous system and     
                                        sense organs (320-389)                 
                                                                               
      15000   1           040  Diseases of the nervous system (320-359)        
      15100               022    Meningitis (320-322)                          
      15200               027    Parkinson's disease (332)                     
      15300               092    Other hereditary and degenerative diseases    
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 50                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                    of the central nervous system (330-331,    
                                    333-337)                                   
      15400               026    Multiple sclerosis (340)                      
      15500               032    Infantile cerebral palsy (343)                
      15600               016    Epilepsy (345)                                
      15700               068    Other diseases of the nervous system (323-    
                                    326, 341-342, 344, 346-359)                
      15800               041  Disorders of the eye and adnexa (360-379)       
      15900               049  Diseases of the ear and mastoid process         
                                    (380-389)                                  
                                                                               
      16000   1           060       VII. Diseases of the circulatory system    
                                         (390-459)                             
                                                                               
      16100   1           053  Rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease     
                                    (390-398)                                  
      16200               033    Acute rheumatic fever (390-392)               
      16300   1           043    Chronic rheumatic heart disease (393-398)     
      16400               034      Diseases of mitral valve (394)              
      16500               034      Diseases of aortic valve (395)              
      16600               046      Diseases of mitral and aortic valves        
                                    (396)                                      
      16700               059      All other chronic rheumatic heart           
                                    disease (393.397-398)                      
      16800   1           030  Hypertensive disease (401-404)                  
      16900               030    Essential hypertension (401)                  
      17000               034    Hypertensive heart disease (402)              
      17100               034    Hypertensive renal disease (403)              
      17200               044    Hypertensive heart and renal disease (404)    
      17300   1           032  Ischemic heart disease (410-414)                
      17400               035    Acute myocardial infarction (410)             
      17500               064    Other acute and subacute forms of ischemic    
                                    heart disease (411)                        
      17600               023    Angina pectoris (413)                         
      17700               087    Old myocardial infarction and other forms     
                                    of Chronic ischemic heart disease (412,    
                                    414)                                       
                                                                               
      17800               043  Diseases of pulmonary circulation (415-417)     
      17900   1           038  Other forms of heart disease (420-429)          
      18000               039    Acute and subacute endocarditis (421)         
      18100               088    Acute pericarditis, acute myocarditis, and    
                                    other diseases of pericardium (420,        
                                    422-423)                                   
      18200   1           037    Other diseases of endocardium (424)           
      18300               034      Mitral valve disorders (424.0)              
      18400               034      Aortic valve disorders (424.1)              
      18500               051      All other diseases of endocardium           
                                    (424.2-424.9)                              
      18600               021    Heart failure (428)                           
      18700               068    Myocarditis, unspecified and myocardial       
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 51    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                    degeneration (429.0-429.1)                 
      18800               072    All other and ill-defined forms of heart      
                                    disease (425-427, 429.2-429.9)             
                                                                               
      18900   1           034  Cerebrovascular diseases (430-438)              
      19000               031    Subarachnoid hemorrhage (430)                 
      19100               059    Intracereoral and other intracranial          
                                    hemorrhage (431-432)                       
      19200               054    Occlusion and stenosis of precerebral         
                                    arteries (433)                             
      19300               082    Cerebral thrombosis and unspecified           
                                    occlusion of cerebral arteries (434.0,     
                                    434.9)                                     
      19400               027    Cerebral embolism (434.1)                     
      19500               053    Acute but ill-defined cerebrovascular         
                                    disease (436)                              
      19600               066    Other and late effects of cerebrovascular     
                                    diseases (435,437-438)                     
      19700   1           059  Diseases of arteries, arterioles, and           
                                    capillaries (440-448)                      
      19800               023    Atherosclerosis (440)                         
      19900               023    Aortic aneurysm (441)                         
      20000               071    All other diseases of arteries, arterioles,   
                                    and capillaries (442-448)                  
      20100   1           084  Diseases of veins and lymphatics, and other     
                                    diseases of circulatory system (451-459)   
      20200               075    Phlebitis, thrombophlebitis, and venous       
                                    embolism and thrombosis (451-453)          
      20300               095    Other diseases of veins and lymphatics and    
                                    all other diseases of circulatory          
                                    system (454-459)                           
                                                                               
      20400   1           061       VIII. Diseases of the respiratory          
                                          system (460-519)                     
                                                                               
      20500               057  Diseases of the upper respiratory tract         
                                    (460-465, 470-478)                         
      20600               046    Acute upper respiratory infections            
                                    (460-465)                                  
      20700               053    Other diseases of upper respiratory tract     
                                    (470-478)                                  
      20800   1           054  Other diseases of the respiratory system        
                                    (466, 480-519)                             
      20900               042    Acute bronchitis and bronchiolitis (466)      
      21000   1           021    Pneumonia (480-486)                           
      21100               025      Viral pneumonia (480)                       
      21200               056      Pneumococcal and other bacterial            
                                    pneumonia (481-482)                        
      21300               048      Bronchopneumonia, organism unspecified      
                                    (485)                                      
      21400               061      Pneumonia due to other and unspecified      
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 52                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                    organism (483, 486)                        
      21500               017    Influenza (487)                               
      21600   1           072    Chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases and    
                                    allied conditions (490-496)                
      21700   1           071      Bronchitis, chronic and unspecified,        
                                    emphysema and asthma (490-493)             
      21800               057       Bronchitis, not specified as acute or      
                                     Chronic (490)                             
      21900               030       Chronic bronchitis (491)                   
      22000               021       Emphysema (492)                            
      22100               018       Asthma (493)                               
      22200               062      Bronchiectasis and extrinsic allergic       
                                    alveolitis (494-495)                       
      22300               063      Chronic airways obstruction, not else-      
                                    where classified (496)                     
      22400               073    Pneumcconioses and other lung diseases due    
                                    to external agents (500-508)               
      22500               055    Empyema and abscess of lung and mediastinum   
                                    (510, 513)                                 
      22600               016    Pleurisy (511)                                
      22700               056    All other diseases of respiratory system      
                                    (512, 514-519)                             
                                                                               
      22800   1           057       IX. Diseases of the digestive system       
                                        (520-579)                              
                                                                               
      22900               060  Diseases of oral cavity, salivary glands,       
                                    and jaws (520-529)                         
      23000   1           057  Diseases of other parts of the digestive        
                                    system (530-579)                           
      23100   1           041    Ulcer of stomach and duodenum (531-533)       
      23200               023      Gastric ulcer (531)                         
      23300               024      Duodenal ulcer (532)                        
      23400               040      Peptic ulcer, site unspecified (533)        
      23500               032    Gastritis and duodenitis (535)                
      23600               024    Appendicitis (540-543)                        
      23700               095    Hernia of abdominal cavity and intestinal     
                                    obstruction without mention of hernia      
                                    (550-553, 560)                             
      23800               059    Regional enteritis and idiopathic             
                                    proctocolitis (555-556)                    
      23900               062    All other noninfective gastroenteritis and    
                                    colitis (557-558)                          
      24000               032    Diverticula of intestine (562)                
      24100   1           043    Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis (571)     
      24200               077      Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis,        
                                    specified as alcoholic (571.0-571.3)       
      24300               057      Chronic hepatitis and biliary cirrhosis     
                                    (571.4,571.6)                              
      24400               117      Cirrhosis of liver and other and unspec-    
                                    ified chronic liver disease without        
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 53    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                    mention of alcohol (571.5,571.8-571.9)     
      24500               061    Cholelithiasis and other disorders of         
                                    gallbladder (574-575)                      
      24600               082    All other diseases of digestive system        
                                    (530, 534, 536-537, 564-570, 572-573,      
                                    576-579)                                   
                                                                               
      24700   1           060       X. Diseases of the genitourinary system    
                                       (580-629)                               
                                                                               
      24800   1           036  Diseases of urinary system (580-599)            
      24900   1           056    Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and            
                                    nephrosis (580-589)                        
      25000               034      Acute glomerulonephritis (580)              
      25100               028      Nephrotic syndrome (581)                    
      25200               140      Chronic glomerulonephritis, nephritis       
                                    and nephropathy, not specified as acute    
                                    or chronic, and renal sclerosis,           
                                    unspecified (582-583, 587)                 
      25300               120      Penal failure, disorders resulting from     
                                    impaired renal function, and small         
                                    kidney of unknown cause (584-586,          
                                    588-589)                                   
      25400               028    Infections of kidney (590)                    
      25500               028    Urinary calculus (592, 594)                   
      25600               056    All other diseases of urinary system          
                                    (591, 593, 595-599)                        
      25700   1   1       041  Diseases of male genital organs (600-608)       
      25800       1       031    Hyperplasia of prostate (600)                 
      25900       1       049    Other diseases of male genital organs         
                                    (601-608)                                  
      26000               029  Disorders of breast (610-611)                   
      26100       2       057  Diseases of female genital organs except        
                                    breast (614-629)                           
                                                                               
      26200   1   2   2   083       XI. Complications of pregnancy, child-     
                                        birth, and the puerperium (630-676)    
                                                                               
      26300   1   2   2   041  Pregnancy with abortive outcome (630-638)       
      26400       2   2   025    Ectopic pregnancy (633)                       
      26500       2   2   028    Spontaneous abortion (634)                    
      26600       2   2   032    Legally induced abortion (635)                
      26700       2   2   034    Illegally induced abortion (636)              
      26800       2   2   057    Other pregnancy with abortive outcome         
                                    (630-632, 637-638)                         
      26900   1   2   2   041  Direct obstetric causes (640-646, 651-676)      
      27000       2   2   054    Hemorrhage of pregnancy and childbirth        
                                    (640-641, 666)                             
      27100       2   2   040    Toxemia of pregnancy (642.4-642.9, 643)       
      27200       2   2   024    Obstructed labor (660)                        
      27300       2   2   043    Complications of the puerperium (670-676)     
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 54                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
      27400       2   2   077    Other direct obstetric causes (642.0-642.3,   
                                    644-646, 651-659, 661-665, 667-669)        
      27500       2   2   035  Indirect obstetric causes (647-648)             
      27600       2   2   042  Delivery in a completely normal case (650)      
                                                                               
      27700   1           070       XII. Diseases of the skin and subcutan-    
                                         eous tissue (680-709)                 
                                                                               
      27800               052  Infections of skin and subcutaneous tissue      
                                    (680-686)                                  
      27900               060  All other diseases of skin and subcutaneous     
                                    tissue (690-709)                           
                                                                               
      28000   1           087       XIII. Diseases of the musculoskeletal      
                                          system and connective tissue         
                                          (710-739)                            
                                                                               
      28100               067  Rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory     
                                    polyarthrocathies (714)                    
      28200               059  Other arthropathies and related disorders       
                                    (710-712,715-719)                          
      28300               022  Dorsopathies (720-724)                          
      28400               040  Rheumatism, excluding the back (725-729)        
      28500               080  Osteopathies, chondropathies, and acquired      
                                    musculoskeletal deformities (730-739)      
                                                                               
      28600   1           046       XIV. Congenital anomalies (740-759)        
                                                                               
      28700               018  Spina bifida (741)                              
      28800               058  All other congenital anomalies of nervous       
                                    system (740,742)                           
      28900               039  Congenital anomalies of heart (745-746)         
      29000               054  Other congenital anomalies of circulatory       
                                    system (747)                               
      29100               048  All other congenital anomalies (743-744,        
                                    748-759)                                   
                                                                               
      29200   1           079       XV. Certain conditions originating in      
                                        the perinatal period (760-779)         
                                                                               
      29300               018  Birth trauma (767)                              
      29400               081  Intrauterine hypoxia, birth asphyxia, and       
                                    respiratory distress syndrome (768-769)    
      29500               070  Other conditions originating in the peri-       
                                    natal period (760-766, 770-779)            
                                                                               
      29600   1           069       XVI. Symptoms, signs, and ill-defined      
                                         conditions (780-799)                  
                                                                               
      29700               043  Senility without mention of psychosis (797)     
      29800               067  Symptoms, signs. and other ill-defined          
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 55    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                    conditions (780-796, 798-799)              
                                                                               
      29900   1           093       Supplementary classification of            
                                    external causes of injury and              
                                    poisoning (E800-E999)                      
                                                                               
      30000   1           041  Accidents and adverse effects (E800-E949)       
      30100   1           033    Transport accidents (E800-E848)               
      30200               033      Railway accidents (E800-E807)               
      30300   1           039      Motor vehicle accidents (E810-E825)         
      30400   1           049        Motor vehicle traffic accidents           
                                      (E810-E819)                              
      30500               045          Involving collision with train (E810)   
      30600               066          Involving collision with another        
                                        motor vehicle (E811-E812)              
      30700               050          Involving collision with pedestrian     
                                        (E814)                                 
      30800               068          Involving collision with other          
                                        vehicle or object (E813, E815)         
      30900               054          Not involving collision on highway      
                                        (E816-E818)                            
      31000               067          Motor vehicle traffic accident of       
                                        unspecified nature (E819)              
      31100               052        Motor vehicle nontraffic accidents        
                                      (E820-E825)                              
      31200               044      Other road vehicle accidents (E826-E829)    
      31300               041      Water transport accidents (E830-E838)       
      31400               049      Air and space transport accidents (E840-    
                                    E845)                                      
      31500               060      Vehicle accidents not elsewhere clas-       
                                    sifiable (E846-E848)                       
      31600   1           034    Accidental poisoning (E850-E869)              
      31700               075      Accidental poisoning by drugs, med-         
                                    icaments, and biologicals (E850-E858)      
      31800               072      Accidental poisoning by other solid or      
                                    liquid substances (E860-E866)              
      31900               056      Accidental poisoning by gases and vapors    
                                    (E867-E869)                                
      32000               091    Misadventures during medical care, abnormal   
                                    reactions, and late complications (E870-   
                                    E879)                                      
      32100   1           030    Accidental falls (E880-E888)                  
      32200               046      Fall from one level to another              
                                    (E880-E884)                                
      32300               034      Fall on same level (E885-E886)              
      32400               076      Fracture, cause unspecified, and other      
                                    and unspecified falls (E887-E888)          
                                                                               
      32500               049    Accidents caused by fire and flames           
                                    (E890-E899)                                
      32600   1           053    Other accidents, including late effects       
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 56                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                    (E900-E929)                                
      32700               020      Lightning (E907)                            
      32800               045      Accidental drowning and submersion          
                                    (E910)                                     
      32900               120      Inhalation and ingestion of food or         
                                    other object causing obstruction of        
                                    respiratory tract or suffocation           
                                    (E911-E912)                                
      33000               039      Accident caused by handgun (E922.0)         
      33100               074      Accidents caused by all other and           
                                    unspecified firearms (E922.1-E922.9)       
      33200               048      Accident caused by explosive material       
                                    (E923)                                     
      33300               123      Accident caused by hot substance or         
                                    object, caustic or corrosive material,     
                                    steam, and exposure to radiation (E924,    
                                    E926)                                      
      33400               046      Accident caused by electric current         
                                    (E925)                                     
      33500               103      All other accidents and late effects of     
                                    accidental injury (E900-E906, E908-        
                                    E909, E913-E921, E927-E929)                
                                                                               
      33600               102    Drugs, medicaments, and biological sub-       
                                    stances causing adverse effects in         
                                    therapeutic use (E930-E949)                
                                                                               
      33700   1       1   019  Suicide (E950-E959)                             
      33800           1   064   Suicide by drugs, medicaments, and             
                                    biologicals (E950.0-E950.5)                
      33900           1   061   Suicide by other solid or liquid sub-          
                                    stances (E950.6-E950.9)                    
      34000           1   041   Suicide by gases and vapors (E951-E952)        
      34100           1   059   Suicide by hanging, strangulation, and         
                                    suffocation (E953)                         
      34200           1   029   Suicide by handgun (E955.0)                    
      34300           1   063   Suicide by all other and unspecified           
                                    firearms (E955.1-E955.4)                   
      34400           1   089   Suicide by all other means and late effects    
                                    of self-inflicted injury (E954, E955.5-    
                                    E959)                                      
      34500   1           043  Homicide and legal intervention (E960-E978)     
      34600               029    Assault by handgun (E965.0)                   
      34700               063    Assault by all other and unspecified          
                                    firearms (E965.1-E965.4)                   
      34800               051    Assault by cutting and piercing               
                                    instrument (E966)                          
      34900               127    Assault by all other means and late           
                                    effects of injury purposely inflicted      
                                    by other person (E960-E964, E965.5-        
                                    E965.9, E967-E969)                         
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 57    
                                                                               
                                                                               
      35000               024    Legal-execution (E978)                        
      35100               091    Other legal intervention and late effects     
                                    of injury due to legal intervention        
                                    (E970-E977)                                
                                                                               
      35200   1           075  Injury undetermined whether accidentally or     
                                    purposely inflicted (E980-E989)            
      35300               071    From poisoning by drugs, medicaments, and     
                                    biologicals (E980.0-E980.5)                
      35400               068    From poisoning by other solid or liquid       
                                    substances (E980.6-E980.9)                 
      35500               033    From injury by handgun (E985.0)               
      35600               067    From injury by all other and unspecified      
                                    firearms (E985.1-E985.4)                   
      35700               141    From injury by all other means and late       
                                    effects of injury, undetermined whether    
                                    accidentally or purposely inflicted        
                                    (E981-E984, E985.5-E989)                   
                                                                               
      35800               051  Injury resulting from operations of war         
                                    (E990-E999)                                
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 58                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                  APPENDIX 3                                   
                                                                               
           NINTH REVISION 72 CAUSES OF DEATH ADAPTED FOR USE BY DVS            
                                                                               
                                                                               
     ST: 1 = Subtotal          Limited: Sex: 1 = Males; 2 = Females            
     Length = of Cause Title            Age: 1 = 5 & Over; 2 = 10-54;          
                                             3 = 28 Days & Over                
                                                                               
         *****  Cause Subtotals are not Identified in this File *****          
                                                                               
       72     S  Limited  Len-                                                 
     Recode   T  Sex Age  gth  Cause Title And ICD-9 Codes Included            
                                                                               
        010               035  Shigellosis and amebiasis (004, 006)            
        020               045  Certain other intestinal infections (007-009)   
        030   1           022  Tuberculosis (010-018)                          
        040               046    Tuberculosis of respiratory system            
                                    (010-012)                                  
        050               030    Other tuberculosis (013-018)                  
        060               020  Whooping cough (033)                            
        070               063  Streptococcal sore throat, scarlatina, and      
                                    erysipelas (034-035)                       
        080               029  Meningococcal infection (036)                   
        090           3   016  Septicemia (038)                                
        100               025  Acute poliomyelitis (045)                       
        110               013  Measles (055)                                   
        120               021  Viral hepatitis (070)                           
        130               018  Syphilis (090-097)                              
        140               109  All other infectious and parasitic diseases     
                                    (001-003, 005, 020-032, 037, 039-041,      
                                    046-054, 056-066, 071-088, 098-139)        
                                                                               
        150   1           089  Malignant neoplasms, including neoplasms of     
                                    lymphatic and hematopoietic tissues        
                                    (140-208)                                  
        160               064    Malignant neoplasms of lip, oral cavity,      
                                    and pharynx (140-149)                      
        170               066    Malignant neoplasms of digestive organs       
                                    and peritoneum (150-159)                   
        180               071    Malignant neoplasms of respiratory and        
                                    intrathoracic organs (160-165)             
        190               040    Malignant neoplasm of breast (174-175)        
        200               049    Malignant neoplasms of genital organs         
                                    (179-187)                                  
        210               049    Malignant neoplasms of urinary organs         
                                    (188-189)                                  
        220               074    Malignant neoplasms of all other and          
                                    unspecified sites (170-173, 190-199)       
        230               020    Leukemia (204-208)                            
        240               076    Other malignant neoplasms of lymphatic        
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 59    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                    and hematopoietic tissues (200-203)        
        250               108  Benign neoplasms, carcinoma in situ, and        
                                    neoplasms of uncertain behavior and        
                                    of unspecified nature (210-239)            
                                                                               
        260               023  Diabetes mellitus (250)                         
        270               034  Nutritional deficiencies (260-269)              
        280               017  Anemias (280-285)                               
        290               020  Meningitis (320-322)                            
                                                                               
        300   1           039  Major cardiovascular diseases (390-448)         
        310   1           041    Diseases of heart (390-398, 402, 404-429)     
        320               057      Rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart         
                                    disease (390-398)                          
        330               036      Hypertensive heart disease (402)            
        340               046      Hypertensive heart and renal disease        
                                    (404)                                      
        350   1           036      Ischemic heart disease (410-414)            
        360               039        Acute myocardial infarction (410)         
        370               068        Other acute and subacute forms of         
                                      ischemic heart disease (411)             
                          027        Angina pectoris (413)                     
        390               091        Old myocardial infarction and other       
                                      forms of chronic ischemic heart          
                                      disease (412, 414)                       
        400               039      Other diseases of endocardium (424)         
        410               054      All other forms of heart disease (415-      
                                    423, 425-429)                              
                                                                               
        420               054    Hypertension with or without renal disease    
                                    (401, 403)                                 
        430   1           036    Cerebrovascular diseases (430-438)            
        440               061      Intracerebral and other intracranial        
                                    hemorrhage (431-432)                       
        450               084      Cerebral thrombosis and unspecified         
                                    occlusion of cerebral arteries (434.0,     
                                    434.9)                                     
        460               029      Cerebral embolism (434.1)                   
        470               076      All other and late effects of cerebro-      
                                    vascular diseases (430, 433, 435-438)      
        480               023    Atherosclerosis (440)                         
        490               067    Other diseases of arteries, arterioles,       
                                    and capillaries (441-448)                  
        500               040  Acute bronchitis and bronchiolitis (466)        
        510   1           033  Pneumonia and influenza (480-487)               
        520               021    Pneumonia (480-486)                           
        530               017    Influenza (487)                               
                                                                               
        540   1           070  Chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases and      
                                    allied conditions (490-496)                
        550               047    Bronchitis, chronic and unspecified           
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 60                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                    (490-491)                                  
        560               017    Emphysema (492)                               
        570               014    Asthma (493)                                  
        580               078    Other chronic obstructive pulmonary           
                                    diseases and allied conditions (494-496)   
                                                                               
        590               039  Ulcer of stomach and duodenum (531-533)         
        600               022  Appendicitis (540-543)                          
        610               093  Hernia of abdominal cavity and intestinal       
                                    obstruction without mention of hernia      
                                    (550-553, 560)                             
        620               041  Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis (571)       
        630               059  Cmolelithiasis and other disorders of gall-     
                                    bladder (574-575)                          
                                                                               
        640   1           054  Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and nephrosis    
                                    (580-589)                                  
        650               059    Acute glomerulonephritis and nepmrotic        
                                    syndrome (580-581)                         
        660               138    Chronic glomerulonephritis, nephritis and     
                                    nepmropathy, not specified as acute or     
                                    chronic, and renal sclerosis,              
                                    unspecified (582-583, 587)                 
        670               118    Renal failure. disorders resulting from       
                                    impaired renal function, and small         
                                    kidney of unknown cause (584-566,          
                                    588-589)                                   
        680               026  Infections of kidney (590)                      
        690       1       029  Hyperplasia of prostate (600)                   
                                                                               
        700   1   2   2   068  Complications of pregnancy, childbirth, and     
                                    the puerperium (630-676)                   
        710       2   2   043   Pregnancy with abortive outcome (630-638)      
        720       2   2   076   Other complications of pregnancy, child-       
                                    birth, and the puerperium (640-676)        
        730               030  Congenital anomalies (740-759)                  
        740   1           064  Certain conditions originating in the           
                                    perinatal period (760-779)                 
        750               097    Birth trauma, intrauterine hypoxia,           
                                    birth asphyxia, and respiratory            
                                    distress syndrome (767-769)                
        760               072    Other conditions originating in the           
                                    perinatal period (760-766, 770-779)        
        770               053  Symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions     
                                    (780-799)                                  
        780               029  All other diseases (Residual)                   
                                                                               
        790   1           041  Accidents and adverse effects (E800-E949)       
        800               037    Motor vehicle accidents (E810-E825)           
        810               063    All other accidents and adverse effects       
                                    (E800-E807, E826-E949)                     
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 61    
                                                                               
                                                                               
        820           1   019  Suicide (E950-E959)                             
        830               043  Homicide and legal intervention (E960-E978)     
        840               037  All other external causes (E980-E999)           
                                                                               
                                                                              
     Page 62                                                     ICPSR 6435    
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                  APPENDIX 4                                   
                                                                               
           NINTH REVISION 34 CAUSES OF DEATH ADAPTED FOR USE BY DVS            
                                                                               
                                                                               
     ST: 1 = Subtotal          Limited: Sex: 1 = Males; 2 = Females            
     Length = of Cause Title            Age: 1 = 5 & Over; 2 = 10-54;          
                                             3 = 28 Days & Over                
                                                                               
         *****  Cause Subtotals are not Identified in this File *****          
                                                                               
       34     S  Limited  Len-                                                 
     Recode   T  Sex Age  gth  Cause Title And ICD-9 Codes Included            
                                                                               
        010               022  Tuberculosis (010-018)                          
        020               018  Syphilis (090-097)                              
        030               071  Residual of infectious and parasitic            
                                    diseases (001-009, 020-088, 098-139)       
                                                                               
        040   1           089  Malignant neoplasms, including neoplasms of     
                                    lymphatic and hematopoietic tissues        
                                    (140-208)                                  
        050               066    Malignant neoplasms of digestive organs       
                                    and peritoneum (150-159)                   
        060               071    Malignant neoplasms of respiratory and        
                                    intrathoracic organs (160-165)             
        070               040    Malignant neoplasm of breast (174-175)        
        080               049    Malignant neoplasms of genital organs         
                                    (179-187)                                  
        090               049    Malignant neoplasms of urinary organs         
                                    (188-189)                                  
        100               020    Leukemia (204-208)                            
        110               053    Other malignant neoplasms (140-149, 170-      
                                    173, 190-203)                              
        120               023  Diabetes mellitus (250)                         
                                                                               
        130   1           039  Major cardiovascular diseases (390-448)         
        140   1           041    Diseases of heart (390-398, 402, 404-429)     
        150               057      Pneumatic fever and rheumatic heart         
                                    disease (390-398)                          
        160               070      Hypertensive heart disease with or          
                                    without renal disease (402, 404)           
        170               036      Ischemic heart disease (410-414)            
        180               034      Other heart diseases (415-429)              
        190               054    Hypertension with or without renal            
                                    disease (401, 403)                         
        200               036    Cerebrovascular diseases (430-438)            
        210               023    Atherosclerosis (440)                         
        220               067    Other diseases of arteries, arterioles,       
                                    and capillaries (441-448)                  
                                                                               
                                                                              
     ICPSR 6435                                                     Page 63    
                                                                               
                                                                               
        230               033  Pneumonia and influenza (480-487)               
        240               070  Chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases and      
                                    allied conditions (490-49G)                
        250               039  Ulcer of stomach and duodenum                   
        260               041  Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis (571)       
        270               054  Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and nephrosis    
                                    (580-589)                                  
        280       2   2   068  Complications of pregnancy, childbirth, and     
                                    the puerperium (630-676)                   
        290               030  Congenital anomalies (740-759)                  
        300               064  Certain conditions originating in the           
                                    perinatal period (760-779)                 
        310               053  Symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions     
                                    (760-799)                                  
        320               029  All other diseases (Residual)                   
                                                                               
        330               035  Motor vericle accidents (E810-E825)             
        340               061  All other accidents and adverse effects         
                                    (E800-E807, E826-E949)                     
        350           1   019  Suicide (E950-E959)                             
        360               043  Homicide and legal intervention (E960-E978)     
        370               037  All other external causes (E980-E999)           
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
